# Cloud Essentials - The Cloud Journey

[AWS Learning Resources](AWS%20Learning%20Resources.md)
[Source](https://explore.skillbuilder.aws/learn/course/134/play/99519/aws-cloud-practitioner-essentials;lp=82)

## The AWS Well-Architected Framework

> [!note] The AWS Well-Architected Framework
> The AWS Well-Architected Framework helps you understand how to design and operate reliable, secure, efficient, and cost-effective systems in the AWS Cloud. It provides a way for you to consistently measure your architecture against best practices and design principles and identify areas for improvement.
> 
> > [!info] Operational Excellence
> > **Operational excellence** is the ability to *run* and *monitor* systems to deliver business value and to continually improve supporting processes and procedures.  
> > 
> > Design principles for operational excellence in the cloud include performing operations as code, annotating documentation, anticipating failure, and frequently making small, reversible changes.
> 
> > [!info] Security
> > The **Security** pillar is the ability to protect information, systems, and assets while delivering business value through risk assessments and mitigation strategies. 
> > 
> > When considering the security of your architecture, apply these best practices:
> > - Automate security best practices when possible.
> > - Apply security at all layers.
> > - Protect data in transit and at rest.
> 
> > [!info] Reliability
> > **Reliability** is the ability of a system to do the following:
> > - Recover from infrastructure or service disruptions
> > - Dynamically acquire computing resources to meet demand
> > - Mitigate disruptions such as misconfigurations or transient network issues
> > 
> > Reliability includes testing recovery procedures, scaling horizontally to increase aggregate system availability, and automatically recovering from failure.
> 
> > [!info] Performance Efficiency
> > **Performance efficiency** is the ability to use computing resources efficiently to meet system requirements and to maintain that efficiency as demand changes and technologies evolve. 
> > 
> > Evaluating the performance efficiency of your architecture includes experimenting more often, using [serverless](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^173173) architectures, and designing systems to be able to go global in minutes.
> 
> > [!info] Cost Optimization
> > **Cost optimization** is the ability to run systems to deliver business value at the lowest price point. 
> > 
> > Cost optimization includes adopting a consumption model, analyzing and attributing expenditure, and using managed services to reduce the cost of ownership.
> 
> > [!info] Sustainability
> > Sustainability is the ability to continually improve sustainability impacts by reducing energy consumption and increasing efficiency across all components of a workload by maximizing the benefits from the provisioned resources and minimizing the total resources required.
> > 
> > To facilitate good design for sustainability:
> > - Understand your impact
> > - Establish sustainability goals
> > - Maximize utilization
> > - Anticipate and adopt new, more efficient hardware and software offerings
> > - Use managed services
> > - Reduce the downstream impact of your cloud workloads

^2ee3e0

## Benefits of the AWS Well-Architected Framework

> [!info] Benefits of the AWS Well-Architected Framework
> - Faster build and deployment timeframes: follow standard practices to achieve faster development time;
> - Cloud-native approaches: build applications optimized for cloud operations;
> - Fewer risks: reviews of the [framework](#^2ee3e0) help find potential risks and issues before they become a problem;
> - Consistency: building a reliable and scalable infrastructure;
> - Insight into potential impact: the processes and procedures you employ with the AWS Well-Architected Framework help you to assess and address potential impacts before the changes are made;
> - Continuous improvement: consistent and frequent reviews against the framework help you to identify areas for improvement.
>   [Source](https://www.lucidchart.com/blog/aws-well-architected-framework-best-practices)

## Benefits of the AWS Cloud

> [!info] Benefits of the AWS Cloud
> - Trade upfront expense for variable expense.
> - Benefit from massive economies of scale.
> - Stop guessing capacity.
> - Increase speed and agility.
> - Stop spending money running and maintaining data centers.
> - Go global in minutes.
