# Cloud Essentials - Compute in the Cloud

> [Source](https://explore.skillbuilder.aws/learn/course/134/play/85854/aws-cloud-practitioner-essentials)
> [AWS Learning Resources](AWS%20Learning%20Resources.md)

## Introduction

> [!summary] Multitenancy
> 
> Multiple virtual machines sharing a physical machine.

```ad-summary
title: Tenancy

How instances are distributed on the hardware:
- Shared: multiple instances sharing the hardware
- Dedicated Instance: a instance run on a physical server dedicated to a customer account. This instance is separated from other accounts' instances, but can share the hardware with other instances that are not dedicated instances under the same account;
- Dedicated Host: a physical server with instance capacity fully dedicated to your use, multiple instances can be placed on this server. Offers more control than dedicated instance does;
- [Difference between dedicated instance and dedicated host.](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/dedicated-instance.html)

```
^tenancy

> [!summary] Host Affinity
> 
> Configurable for [dedicated hosts](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^tenancy). Host affinity allows instances to reside on the same host. For other tenancy types, each time the instance starts, it starts on a random host.

> [!summary] Hypervisor
> 
> The program that manages virtual machines and allocate resources.

> [!note] EC2
> 
> Elastic compute cloud (EC2) is a service that is used to access the virtual servers provided by AWS. The 2 signifies 2 Cs in the name.
> 
> EC2 is run as *instances*. The system and software installed on EC2 can all be configured. The CPU, RAM, and storage available can also be scaled easily.

^d12940

> [!info] Advantages of Using EC2
> 
> - You can provision and launch an Amazon EC2 instance within minutes.
> - You can stop using it when you have finished running a workload.
> - You pay only for the compute time you use when an instance is running, not when it is stopped or terminated.
> - You can save costs by paying only for server capacity that you need or want.

## EC2 Instance Types

> [!tip]
> 
Also known as EC2 instance families

> [!note] General Purpose
> 
> - Balanced computing, memory, and storage resources.
> - Good for app servers, web servers, game servers, backend servers, and small and medium databases.

> [!note] Compute Optimized
> 
> - Higher computational power.
> - Suitable for compute-intensive app, game, web servers, and scientific modeling.
> - Also can be used for batch processing workloads that require [processing many transactions in a single group](Batch%20Processing.md).


> [!note] Memory Optimized
> 
> - Provides high memory.
> - Ideal for high-performance *database *or a workload that involves performing real-time processing of a large amount of unstructured data.

> [!note] Accelerated Computing
> 
> - Uses [hardware accelerators or coprocessors](Coprocessors.md).
> - Hardware accelerators perform better in floating point number calculations, graphics processing, and data pattern matching.
> - Good for graphics applications, game streaming, and application streaming.

> [!note] Storage Optimized
> 
> - Designed for workloads that require high, sequential read and write access to large datasets on local storage.
> - Examples: distributed *file* systems, data warehousing applications, and high-frequency online transaction processing (OLTP) systems
> - High input/output operations per second (IOPS) capacity.

## Pricing

> [!summary] Availability Zone & Region
> 
An availability region is a large geographic region containing the AWS servers. Each region consists of multiple availability zones. Zones are isolated from other zones' failures.
^avail

> [!note] On-Demand
> 
> **On-Demand Instances** are ideal for short-term, irregular workloads that cannot be interrupted. No upfront costs or minimum contracts apply. The instances run continuously until you stop them, and you pay for only the compute time you use.
> 
> Suited for short or unpredictable usage, such as in a development environment.

> [!note] Reserved
> 
> State upfront what *instance type and size* (like M5.large), *platform*, and *[tenancy](#^tenancy)* to use in one region, and make a 1 or 3 year commitment. For the **standard reserved instances**, also have the option to specify an availability *zone* for the reserved instance, known as **capacity reservation**. 
> 
> For **convertible reserved instances**, the availability zone and instance type can change, but the discount is lower.
> 
>  Suited for steady state, long-term usage. When the commitment period ends, on-demand rates apply. Either terminate the instance or start a new one.

> [!note] Saving Plan
> Another discount plan that gives discount from the on-demand rates. The user makes a *dollars spent per hour* commitment for 1 to 3 years. Usage up to the commitment is charged at the **saving plan** rates. Above the rate, on-demand rates apply. 
> 
> Any usage of an EC2 instance in a *chosen region* can enjoy the reduced cost. The plan does not require instance type and size, OS, and tenancy to be specified get a discount. Also do not need to commit a certain number of instances for 1 or 3 years. The plan does not have an EC2 capacity reservation option. 
> 
> Suitable for more flexible, long-term usage.

> [!note] Spot Instances
> The highest discount, up to 90%. The **spot instance** can be started when there is capacity, and when the capacity is scarce or requests for spot instances increase, the spot instance will be interrupted. 
>
> Suitable for workloads that can withstand interruptions.

> [!note] Dedicated Host
> **Dedicated Hosts** are physical servers with Amazon EC2 instance capacity that is fully dedicated to your use. 
> 
> You can use your existing per-socket, per-core, or per-VM software licenses to help maintain license compliance. You can purchase On-Demand Dedicated Hosts and Dedicated Hosts Reservations. Of all the Amazon EC2 options that were covered, Dedicated Hosts are the most expensive.

## Scaling Amazon EC2

> [!note] AWS Auto Scaling
> 
> AWS Auto Scaling adds and removes EC2 instances in response to changing demand.
> 
> - Dynamic Scaling: Scale in response to demand;
> - Predictive Scaling: Predict the number of instances needed based on usage data;
> - The two can be used together.

^54e59a

> [!note] Auto Scaling Settings
>
> - Size of the **auto scaling group** can be configured
> 	- Minimum: the min number of instances needed to run the service;
> 	- Desired: the desired number of instances; can be the same as minimum;
> 	- Maximum: the max number of instances AWS Auto Scaling can add.

^ccf4fc

> [!info] Decoupled System
> In the coffee making example, separating the order-taking and coffee-making systems allows accurate provisioning of resources for the two systems, such that resources are not wasted.
> 
> For AWS auto scaling, this means different number of instances can be added to different parts of the service you provide.

## Elastic Load Balancing

> [!note] Elastic Load Balancing (ELB)
> 
> A load balancer distributes incoming requests to instances in the [auto scaling group](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^ccf4fc).

^f73a6d

> [!note] Applications of ELB
> - ELB is a *regional* construct rather than working on a single EC2 instance; 
> - Works with [AWS Auto Scaling](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^54e59a) to ensure stable performance;
> - ELB auto-scales in response to changing incoming requests without changing the hourly cost;
> - ELB can be used to distribute external requests and internal requests between two  [auto scaling groups](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^ccf4fc).

> [!info] Other Load Balancers
> 
> There are other load balancers out there that can be used for AWS, but it takes more effort to install, manage, update, scale, handle fail over, and availability of these alternate options.

## Messaging and Queuing

> [!summary] Monolithic Application
> 
> A monolithic application is tightly integrated. Everything must be in sync for the system to function. If one part fails, the failure propagates to other parts.

> [!note] Messaging and Queuing
> 
> A **queue** can be placed between components of an app to store **messages** sent between the components. This way, even one part of the app fails, the other parts can keep sending messages into the queue.
> 
> When a message is sent into the queue, the other parts can retrieve the message from the queue, process it, and delete it from the queue.

> [!summary] Payload
> 
> Payload refers to the data contained in the message. On AWS, the data is protected until the message is delivered.

> [!note] AWS Simple Queue Service
> 
> AWS SQS is the service that allows software components to send and queue messages. SQS scales automatically and is easy to configure.

> [!note] AWS Simple Notification Service
> 
> SNS is also a service to send messages. SNS uses a publish/subscribe model. End users can subscribe to a SNS topic. Then messages published to this topic will be sent to all subscribed users automatically.
> 
> SMS(text messages), emails, and push notifications can be sent to end users using this service.
> 
> Besides human users, SNS can send messages to SQS queues, [AWS Lambda functions](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^071256), and HTTPS or HTTP web hooks.

## Other Compute Resources

> [!summary] Serverless Computing
> 
> A type of computing offered by AWS. The users do not access the server infrastructure. The code or application is managed automatically and scaled automatically.

^173173

> [!note] AWS Lambda
> 
> - Lambda functions are pieces of code that can be triggered to run when a set event happens;
> - Lambda functions are a type of [serverless computing](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^173173);
> - Lambda functions are suitable for tasks that can be completed in less than *15 minutes*;
> - Autoscales to demand.

^071256

> [!summary] Containerized Apps
> 
> A containerized app is a container that includes everything an app needs to run. It runs on a virtualized system, is portable, and is isolated from other containers.
> 
> On AWS, containerized apps can be run on one [EC2](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^d12940) instance, multiple instances (clusters) or [AWS Fargate](#^91aeaf), a serverless platform.

^c8391a

> [!note] Container Orchestration
> 
> When running multiple [containerized apps](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^c8391a), they need to be individually started, stopped, restarted, and monitored. This process is called container orchestration.

^90f787

 > [!note] AWS ECS
> 
> AWS Elastic Container Service is a [container orchestration tool](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^90f787) used to control Docker apps. It can be run on [EC2 instances](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^d12940) or on [AWS Fargate](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^91aeaf)

> [!note] AWS EKS
> 
> AWS Elastic Kubernetes Service is another [container orchestration](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^90f787) tool. Similarly, it can be run on [EC2 instances](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^d12940) or on [AWS Fargate](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^91aeaf)

> [!note] AWS Fargate
> 
> AWS Fargate is a [serverless](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^173173) platform for running containerized apps. The users do not have access to the OS and do not need to manage any [instances](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^d12940).

^91aeaf

