# Cloud Essentials - Global Infrastructure

>[Source](https://explore.skillbuilder.aws/learn/course/134/play/99519/aws-cloud-practitioner-essentials)
>[AWS Learning Resources](AWS%20Learning%20Resources.md)
## Introduction

> [!summary] Regions
> 
> AWS operates globally in geographic *regions*. The regions are independent from each other. The default region can be changed in the console by setting the `AWS_DEFAULT_REGION` environment variable.
> 
> See also [availability zones and regions](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^avail) and [official document](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/UserGuide/Concepts.RegionsAndAvailabilityZones.html).

^168c5b

> [!summary] Local Zone
> 
> A local zone is also under a [region](2.3%20Global%20Infrastructure.md#^168c5b). It is used to serve applications to users with ultra-low latency and does not have access to all the AWS services. Compute and storage services, such as AWS EC2, Amazon Elastic Block Store, Amazon Virtual Private Cloud are available in local zones. Read more at [the official FAQ](https://aws.amazon.com/about-aws/global-infrastructure/localzones/faqs/)


## AWS Global Infrastructure

> [!summary] Regional Data Sovereignty
> 
> The [regions](2.3%20Global%20Infrastructure.md#^168c5b) are connected via high speed network. However, the regions are independent in the sense that no data enters or leaves a region without the customer's consent.

> [!note] Choosing a Region
> 
> 1. Compliance: data compliance; does the data have to be in a specific [region](2.3%20Global%20Infrastructure.md#^168c5b);
> 2. Proximity: proximity to user base;
> 3. Features availability: hardware availability in regions; some AWS services are only available in certain regions;
> 4. Pricing: some regions are more expensive than others are due to taxes and other reasons.

> [!summary] Availability Zone
> 
> An availability zone is a data center or a group of data centers within a [region](2.3%20Global%20Infrastructure.md#^168c5b). A region typically contains multiple AZs.
> 
> AWS recommends running applications in at least two AZs so that when one AZ fails, the application can still run in the other AZ.

^ac13d0

> [!note] Regional Service
> 
> Some services, such as [ELB](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^f73a6d), runs at the region level. They automatically have access to instances running in all [AZs](2.3%20Global%20Infrastructure.md#^ac13d0). This way being in different AZs does not impact service availability.

## Edge Locations

> [!note] AWS CloudFront
> 
> AWS CloudFront is a [content delivery network](Content%20Delivery%20Network.md) managed by AWS. It uses [edge locations](2.3%20Global%20Infrastructure.md#^8f33ce) (edge servers) to deliver images, videos, applications, and APIs to users.

^6894c0

> [!note] Amazon Route 53
> 
> Amazon Route 53 refers to AWS's domain name service, or DNS.

^165290

> [!summary] Origin
> 
> An origin is the place from which [edge locations](2.3%20Global%20Infrastructure.md#^8f33ce) get the files. Examples of [CloudFront](2.3%20Global%20Infrastructure.md#^6894c0) origins include Amazon Simple Storage Service (Amazon S3) buckets and web servers.

> [!summary] Edge Locations
> 
> Edge locations are separate from [regions](2.3%20Global%20Infrastructure.md#^168c5b). Content can be pushed from inside a region to edge locations around the world. Edge locations also run [Amazon Route 53](2.3%20Global%20Infrastructure.md#^165290)

^8f33ce

## Provisioning AWS Resources

> [!summary] Provisioning AWS Resources
> 
> AWS resources are controlled via APIs. Launching [EC2 instances](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^d12940), monitoring service status, and creating [lambda functions](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^071256) are some examples of provisioning resources.

^263462

> [!note] AWS Management Console
> 
> A web interface to [provision AWS resources](2.3%20Global%20Infrastructure.md#^263462). Visual interaction.

> [!note] AWS CLI
> 
> Command line interface to [provision AWS resources](2.3%20Global%20Infrastructure.md#^263462).

> [!note] AWS SDK
> 
> AWS software development kits are available for many languages to [provision AWS resources](2.3%20Global%20Infrastructure.md#^263462).

> [!note] AWS Elastic Beanstalk
> 
> A managed tool for [provisioning AWS resources](2.3%20Global%20Infrastructure.md#^263462). AWS Elastic Beanstalk is used for provisioning EC2-based environments. The application code and desired configurations are submitted to AWS Elastic Beanstalk, and it creates the environment automatically. Environment configurations can be **saved** to deploy again.
> 
> The following tasks are completed:
> - Adjust capacity
> - Load balancing
> - Automatic scaling
> - Application health monitoring

> [!note] AWS CloudFormation
> 
> Another managed tool for [provisioning AWS resources](2.3%20Global%20Infrastructure.md#^263462). A wide range of services can be defined in a declarative way using JSON or YAML templates called CloudFormation templates. This services allows you to declare what you want to build without saying how to build it. Then CloudFormation will build the environment based on the templates.
> 
> Besides EC2-based solutions, CloudFormation support many different AWS resources from storage, databases, analytics, machine learning, and more.
> 
> You can run the same CloudFormation template in multiple accounts or multiple regions, and it will create identical environments across them.


