# Cloud Essentials - Storage and Databases

[AWS Learning Resources](AWS%20Learning%20Resources.md)
[Source](https://explore.skillbuilder.aws/learn/course/134/play/99519/aws-cloud-practitioner-essentials)

## Instance Stores and Amazon Elastic Block Store (Amazon EBS)

> [!note] Instance Store
> An instance store consists of multiple instance store volumes. Instance stores are temporary storage that is associated with the physical hardware of the host machine. When an instance restarts, the data stored is gone. See [instance storage](Types%20of%20Storage.md#^f4da18).

> [!note] Amazon Elastic Block Storage
> Amazon Elastic Block Storage (EBS) is a type of block storage that remains with the instance. When the instance restarts, the data is still available.
> 
> The volume size and type of the EBS can be configured. The max size of EBS storage is 16 tebibyte. After creation, the EBS is attached to an instance. [Amazon EBS](2.5%20Storage%20and%20Databases.md#^85fa11) is a [availability zone-level](2.3%20Global%20Infrastructure.md#^ac13d0) service. It is stored within 1 availability zone.

^85fa11

> [!note] EBS Snapshot
> [EBS](2.5%20Storage%20and%20Databases.md#^85fa11) snapshots are backups of an EBS volume. EBS snapshots are incremental backups, meaning each time only the blocks of data that are changed are saved.

## Amazon Simple Storage Service

> [!note] Amazon Simple Storage Service
> Amazon Simple Storage Service (S3) is a service providing [object-level storage](Types%20of%20Storage.md#^77504f). The objects are stored in buckets, like a folder. The permissions of the buckets can be managed. The max size of an object is 5 Tb. There is no limit to total storage. The objects can be **versioned** to be traced back. 
> 
> Files stored in S3 can be set to allow downloading via public ip addresses.

^e013be

> [!note] AWS S3 Tiers
> There are multiple tiers of [AWS S3](2.5%20Storage%20and%20Databases.md#^e013be).
> 
> 1. **S3 Standard**: frequent Access, stored in 3 different [availability zones](2.3%20Global%20Infrastructure.md#^ac13d0) to be failsafe. The customer can choose the [region](2.3%20Global%20Infrastructure.md#^168c5b). Good for static web hosting, content distribution, and data analytics. It has higher cost than the infrequent access options;
> 2. **S3 Standard-Infrequent Access**: not used often but needs to instant access when needed. Lower storage price and higher retrieval price than S3 standard;
> 3. **S3 One Zone-Infrequent Access**: stores data in 1 [availability zone](2.3%20Global%20Infrastructure.md#^ac13d0). Lower storage price than S3 standard-IA;
> 4. **S3 Intelligent Tiering**: monitors the access pattern of each object. If it is not accessed in 30 days, it is moved to S3 standard-IA. Then if it is accessed, it is moved back to S3 standard. A management fee is paid for each object;
> 5. **S3 Glacier Instant Retrieval**: provides instant retrieval of archived data;
> 6. **S3 Glacier Flexible Retrieval**: retrieves archived data within minutes to hours;
> 7. **S3 Glacier Deep Archive**: retrieves archive data within 12 - 48 hours;
> 8. **S3 Outpost**: object storage for local [AWS outposts](2.3%20Global%20Infrastructure.md#^17e082). The data is stored on multiple local devices and servers.

^210dd6

> [!note] Vault Policies
> Vault locks are features for the [S3 Glacier tiers](2.5%20Storage%20and%20Databases.md#^210dd6), intended for audit data that should be kept for several years without modification. Vaults can be created and populated with archives. A Write Once Read Many (WORM) vault policy can be written to prevent the vault from further edits.

> [!note] Lifetime Policies
> 
> The lifetime policies are written to automatically transfer data to other [S3 tiers](2.5%20Storage%20and%20Databases.md#^210dd6) after some time passed. For example, if some data is not accessed for 30 days, move it from S3 standard to S3 standard-IA.

> [!note] Amazon Athena
> Amazon Athena is a [serverless](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^173173) query service that allows you to analyze data directly in Amazon [S3](#^e013be) using standard SQL queries. You don't need to set up or manage any infrastructure; you only pay for the queries you run. It is well-suited for ad-hoc and exploratory analysis on data stored in S3 without the need for maintaining a separate database.

## Amazon Elastic File System

> [!note] Amazon Elastic File Storage
> Amazon Elastic File System (EFS) provides a shared Linux file system that is uses [block storage](Types%20of%20Storage.md#^ecdca8). EFS scales automatically to storage size.
> 
> Take note that [Amazon EBS](2.5%20Storage%20and%20Databases.md#^85fa11) is a [availability zone-level](2.3%20Global%20Infrastructure.md#^ac13d0) service, meaning it needs to be in the same availability zone as the instance. It also does not scale up when the storage limit is reached. Amazon EFS is [a regional service](2.3%20Global%20Infrastructure.md#^36505c). Multiple instances within the same region can access it at the same time, and it scales up and down automatically. On-premises servers can access Amazon EFS using 
[AWS Direct Connect](2.4%20Networking.md#^43244c).

## Amazon Relational Database Service

> [!summary] Relational Database
> Relational databases store pieces of data that are related to each other. Such as customer information and their purchases in the store. Data storing and querying in relational databases are done with SQL.

^026255

> [!note] Amazon Relational Database Service
> Amazon Relational Database Service (RDS) hosts relational databases on AWS. It supports [Amazon Aurora](#^201ed8), PostgreSQL, MySQL, MariaDB, Oracle Database, and Microsoft MySQL server. Amazon RDS automates tasks such as hardware provisioning, database setup, patching, and backups.
>
> The service will launch the primary _and standby_ databases in _different_ Availability Zones and set up synchronous replication of data and failover strategy. If the primary database goes down, the standby picks up the traffic.
> 
> In addition, Amazon RDS can be integrated with other AWS services, such as using a [lambda function](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^071256) to query the database for a [serverless application](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^173173).

^97e6e1

> [!note] Amazon Aurora
> Amazon Aurora is Amazon's own database engine. It is an enterprise-class [relational database](#^026255), compatible with MySQL and PostgreSQL relational databases. Amazon Aurora maintains six copies of your data across three Availability Zones and continuously backs up your data to Amazon S3.

^201ed8

## Amazon DynamoDB

> [!summary] Nonrelational Database
> In nonrelational databases, data are stored in tables. There are keys that identify items, and there are attributes of the items. Not every item has to have the same attributes.
>
> Non relational databases do not require strict schemas (how data tables are related to each other) like [relational databases](2.5%20Storage%20and%20Databases.md#^026255) do. That means they cannot handle complex queries but have faster response time and allow more variation in the data stored.

^058c4a

> [!note] Amazon DynamoDB
> Amazon DynamoDB is a [nonrelational database](2.5%20Storage%20and%20Databases.md#^058c4a) service, storing data in key-value pairs. It is [serverless](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^173173) and scales automatically.
>
> Amazon DynamoDB is also highly performant, offering millisecond response time. When response time is more important than storing inter-related data, Amazon DynamoDB might be a better option than [Amazon RDS](#^97e6e1).

^db2f01

## Amazon Redshift

> [!summary] Data Warehouses
> Traditional [relational databases](2.5%20Storage%20and%20Databases.md#^026255) are engineered to store and query real-time data. However, they do not perform well when access to large amounts historical data or multiple databases for data analysis is needed. Data warehouses are engineered for this kinds of purposes.

^2c7d22

> [!note] Amazon Redshift
> Amazon Redshift is a [data warehouse](2.5%20Storage%20and%20Databases.md#^2c7d22) solution. It scales automatically and has high performance. There are also other data warehousing solutions available that can be run on AWS. Amazon Redshift can store massive amounts of data. Redshift nodes in multiple petabyte sizes is very common.

> [!note] Amazon Redshift Spectrum
> Amazon Redshift Spectrum is a tool to run a single SQL query against exabytes of unstructured data running in data lakes.

## AWS Database Migration Service

> [!note] AWS Database Migration Service
> Database migration to the cloud can be done manually following standard practices, or with AWS Database Migration Service (DMS). The database and data can be of the same type or different types. When they are the same, DMS transfers the data. Otherwise, the database is converted to the target type using the **AWS Schema Conversion Tool** then transferred. Using DMS, the original database remains operational during migration.

^4be496

> [!note] Other Uses of AWS DMS
> Other uses of [AWS DMS](2.5%20Storage%20and%20Databases.md#^4be496): 
> - Development and test database migrations: copy production database to development environment;
> - Database consolidation: merge multiple databases into 1;
> - Continuous replication: continuously copy database to another location for backup or proximity to other users.

## Other Database Services

> [!note] Amazon DocumentDB
> A document database that supports MongoDB workloads, great for content management, catalogs, and user profiles.  

> [!note] Amazon Neptune
> A graph database, used for social networking and recommendation engines, also great for fraud detection needs.

> [!note] Amazon Managed Blockchain
> Amazon Managed Blockchain is a service that you can use to create and manage blockchain networks with open-source frameworks. 
> 
> Blockchain is a distributed ledger system that lets multiple parties run transactions and share data without a central authority.

> [!note] Amazon Quantum Ledger Database
> Amazon Quantum Ledger Database (Amazon QLDB) is a ledger database service. It is an immutable system of records where no entry can be removed from the audits. You can use Amazon QLDB to review a complete history of all the changes that have been made to your application data. 

> [!note] Amazon ElastiCache
> An in-memory database. It can be used to add a cache layer to databases to make it read faster. Amazon ElastiCache comes in memcached and redis flavors.
> 
> Other applications include caching, session management, gaming leaderboards, geospatial applications

> [!note] Amazon MemoryDB for Redis
> Amazon MemoryDB for redis is also an in-memory database.

> [!note] Amazon Timestream
> Amazon Timestream is a time-series database used for Internet of Things (IoT) applications, DevOps, industrial telemetry.

> [!note] Amazon Keyspaces
> Amazon Keyspaces is a wide column database used for high-scale industrial apps for equipment maintenance, fleet management, route optimization

> [!note] Amazon DynamoDB Accelerator
> Amazon DynamoDB Accelerator (DAX) is a caching layer for [Amazon DynamoDB](2.5%20Storage%20and%20Databases.md#^db2f01) .

> [!info] Running a Database on EC2
> Databases can also be run on [EC2 instances](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^d12940), such as [memory optimized](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^e33e55) for high performance databases, [general purpose](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^db6c02) for small databases, and [storage optimized](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^00d6a8) for data storage. 
> 
> Using a managed database from AWS simplifies the configuration and setup of your databases. It also takes care of time-consuming and complex activities.

> [!note] AWS Glue
> AWS Glue is a [serverless](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^173173), fully managed extract, transform, and load (ETL) service that makes it easier to discover, prepare, and combine data for analytics, machine learning (ML), and application development..

> [!note] Amazon QuickSight
> Amazon QuickSight powers data-driven organizations with unified business intelligence (BI) at hyperscale. With QuickSight, all users can meet varying analytic needs from the same source of truth through modern interactive dashboards, paginated reports, embedded analytics, and natural language queries.

> [!note] Amazon Kinesis
> Amazon Kinesis is primarily used for real-time data streaming and analytics.

> [!note] Amazon Elastic MapReduce
> Amazon EMR is a cloud-based big data platform that uses Apache Hadoop and other open-source frameworks.

> [!note] Access Analyzer for S3
> This service is designed to review and analyze access policies for [S3](#^e013be) buckets, providing insights into who has access to your buckets and how that access is granted. It is the most suitable option for the specified requirement.

> [!note] S3 Storage Lens
> This service provides organization-wide visibility into object storage usage and activity.

> [!note] S3 Multi-Region Access Points
> This service is designed for multi-region access to S3 data.

> [!note] AWS Storage Gateway
> AWS Storage Gateway is a **hybrid** cloud storage service that allows on-premises applications to seamlessly access AWS cloud-based storage. It provides a local cache for frequently accessed data to ensure low-latency access, while storing data in the cloud for durability and scalability.

> [!note] Amazon Macie
> Amazon Macie is a data security service that uses machine learning (ML) and pattern matching to discover and help protect your sensitive data. It can be used to secure sensitive data stored in the cloud by identifying and alerting on any unauthorized access or breaches.
> - Enable Macie in the [console](2.3%20Global%20Infrastructure.md#^a27e82) or with an [API call](2.3%20Global%20Infrastructure.md#^0aac82);
> - Automatically generate [S3](2.5%20Storage%20and%20Databases.md#^e013be) bucket inventory and provide insights on bucket-level security and access controls;
> - Automatically generate interactive data map of your sensitive data in S3;
> - Run targeted, sensitive data discovery jobs based on results from the interactive data map;
> - Generate findings and send to [EventBridge](#^7ceb14) and AWS Security Hub for automated remediation and workflow integration.
> [Source](https://aws.amazon.com/macie/)

