# Cloud Essentials - Monitoring and Analytics

[AWS Learning Resources](AWS%20Learning%20Resources.md)
[Source](https://explore.skillbuilder.aws/learn/course/134/play/99519/aws-cloud-practitioner-essentials;lp=82)

## Amazon CloudWatch

> [!note] Amazon CloudWatch
> Amazon CloudWatch is a web service to provide near real-time **metrics** on various AWS services. A dashboard and graphs can be created from the metrics. Custom metrics can also be created in CloudWatch.
> 
> **Alarms** can be created to respond to certain actions.
> 
> You can use CloudWatch with [CloudTrail](#^272a6f) to monitor and receive alerts about console sign-in events that involve the AWS account root user, or with [AWS Budgets](2.8%20Pricing%20and%20Support.md#^f3967d) to manage cost of service.

^19f9dc

> [!note] Amazon CloudWatch Alarm
> Amazon CloudWatch Alarms can be set up for [CloudWatch](2.7%20Monitoring%20and%20Analytics.md#^19f9dc) metrics. When a threshold is met, an alert is generated and an action will be triggered. 
> 
> Alarms are integrated with [Amazon SNS](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^bcd2c3). This way messages can be sent to employees when an alarm activates.

> [!info] Benefits of Amazon CloudWatch
> 1. A central place to view all the data;
> 2. Visibility across the entire tech stack and correlate data to quickly identify problems, reducing MTTR and TCO;
> 	1. MTTR: mean time to resolution, the mean time to resolve a problem;
> 	2. TCO: total cost of ownership, the price and operating cost of an asset.
> 3. Gain insights to optimize applications and operational resources.

## AWS CloudTrail

> [!note] AWS CloudTrail
> AWS CloudTrail records all the API calls made to the AWS, including information about the identity of the API caller, the time of the API call, the source IP address of the API caller, and more.

^272a6f

> [!note] AWS CloudTrail Insight
> An optional feature of [AWS CloudTrail](#^272a6f). This feature monitors abnormal API activities and alerts the user to take actions.

## AWS Trusted Advisor

> [!note] AWS Trusted Advisor
> An automated advisor that evaluate your AWS resources. It will evaluate your architecture against 5 pillars:
> - cost optimization
> - performance
> - security
> - fault tolerance
> - service limits
> 
> It returns 1 of 3 states for each check: Action recommended, investigation recommended, and no problems.
> 
> There are free checks and additional ones depending on the support plan.

^bd3f17

## AWS Compute Analyzer

> [!note] AWS Compute Analyzer
> 
> AWS Compute Optimizer analyzes your Amazon EC2 usage patterns and provides recommendations for rightsizing your [EC2](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^d12940) instances, helping you optimize performance and reduce costs. It considers factors such as CPU utilization, memory utilization, and network throughput to make recommendations tailored to your workload.
> 
> Together with [Cost Explorer](2.8%20Pricing%20and%20Support.md#^a704aa), they identify rightsizing opportunities for EC2 instances.

## AWS X-Ray

> [!note] AWS X-Ray
> Helps trace requests as they travel through applications, providing insights into application performance.

## AWS System Manager

> [!note] AWS System Manager
> - **Parameter Store** provides a way to store configuration data for your application. This can be either plain-text strings or passwords used to access services such as databases. A main benefit of the Parameter Store is the ability to use the same key but contain different values for systems.
> 
> - **AWS AppConfig** provides an API and console method for applying configuration changes across AWS services from a centralized place.
> 
> - **Automation** provides a set of predefined playbooks to do common repetitive tasks but also allows for users to create their own playbooks that are appropriate for their specific services.
> 
> - **Distributer** allows for the central storage, distribution, and installation of software packages to instances within AWS, including software agents.
> 
> - **Explorer** provides a customizable dashboard that provides information on the *health* of your entire AWS environment and can consolidate data spanning multiple accounts and regions.
> 
> - **Inventory** collects information from all services you have provisioned with AWS, including configuration and licensing information.
> 
> - **OpsCenter** provides a consolidated view for developers and operations staff to view and investigate any operational issues.
> 
> - **Patch Manager** allows for automatically handle patching of systems across EC2 or on-premises systems through the use of baselines.

## AWS Config

> [!note] AWS Config
> AWS Config continuously **monitors** and **records** changes to your AWS resources. You can use AWS Config to assess, audit, and evaluate the configurations of your AWS resources.

