# Cloud Essentials - Pricing and Support

[AWS Learning Resources](AWS%20Learning%20Resources.md)
[Source](https://explore.skillbuilder.aws/learn/course/134/play/99519/aws-cloud-practitioner-essentials;lp=82)

## AWS Free Tier

> [!note] AWS Free Tier
> The free tiers are free-to-use AWS resources composed of 3 tiers:
> - Always free: [lambda functions](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^071256) up to 1 million requests and 3.2 million seconds of compute time;
> - 12-month free: free within 12 months of signing up, such [S3](2.5%20Storage%20and%20Databases.md#^e013be) for 5 gigs of storage, [EC2](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^d12940) with a cap on compute time, and amounts of [CloudFront](2.3%20Global%20Infrastructure.md#^6894c0) data transferred out;
> - Trial: trail time for some services, such as [Amazon Lightsail](2.8%20Pricing%20and%20Support.md#^64b8e9), which offers 750 free hours of usage over a 30-day period.
> - [Full list](https://aws.amazon.com/free)

> [!note] Amazon Lightsail
> Amazon Lightsail is a platform to deploy ready-made application stacks. It is less configurable and scalable than [EC2](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^d12940) but more convenient to use for simple applications and development and testing.
> 
> [Lightsail vs. EC2](https://aws.amazon.com/free/compute/lightsail-vs-ec2/)

^64b8e9

## AWS Pricing Concepts

> [!note] Pricing Models
> - **Pay for what you use**: pay for the time when the service is active;
> - **Pay less when you reserve**: some service offered reserved options that have a significant discount compared to on-demand options, such as [reserved EC2 instances](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^788275);
> - **Pay less with volume-based discounts**: some service offer tiered pricing. So the more you use, the cheaper it is. For example, [S3](2.5%20Storage%20and%20Databases.md#^e013be) becomes cheaper as you use more gigs.

^d31aba

> [!note] AWS Pricing Calculator
> The AWS Pricing Calculator allows you to get a cost estimate for a service. A link for the result can be generated and shared. Services can be organized in "groups" to calculate total cost.

## Billing Dashboard

> [!note] AWS Billing and Cost Management Dashboard
> The billing dashboard is the place to pay your AWS bill, monitor your usage, and analyze and control your costs. 
> - Compare your current month-to-date balance with the previous month, and get a forecast of the next month based on current usage.
> - View month-to-date spend by service.
> - View Free Tier usage by service.
> - Access Cost Explorer and create budgets.
> - Purchase and manage Savings Plans.
> - Publish [AWS Cost and Usage Reports](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cur/latest/userguide/what-is-cur.html).

## Consolidated Billing

> [!note] Consolidated Billing
> [AWS Organizations](2.6%20Security%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^8ab2cb) allows managing multiple accounts under a primary account. The bills for all the accounts can be viewed and paid together. The usage can add up to qualify for [volume discount](#^d31aba).

> [!note] AWS Enterprise Discount Program
> The AWS EDP is for large enterprises with significant AWS consumption spend. In return for enterprise level consumption commitments, customers get discounted pricing.

## AWS Budgets

> [!note] AWS Budgets
> AWS Budgets allows you to set a limit to your monthly usage of AWS services. An alarm can be set to trigger when the usage exceeds a certain percent of the budget.
> 
> To set a budget, navigate to the billing section of the [AWS console](2.3%20Global%20Infrastructure.md#^a27e82), click budget, click create budget.

^f3967d

## AWS Cost Anomaly Detection

> [!note] AWS Cost Anomaly Detection
> A machine learning tool to watch for abnormal spending and alert the user. Can be used with [AWS Budgets](#^f3967d) to avoid unexpected bills.

## AWS Cost Explorer

> [!note] AWS Cost Explorer
> AWS Cost Explorer is a tool to view historical data, predicted cost in the future, and plots showing cost percentages of each service.
> 
> AWS resources can be tagged, and the cost explorer allows you to filter resources by tags to create custom reports

^a704aa

## AWS Support Plans

> [!note] AWS Personal Health Dashboard
> AWS Personal Health Dashboard is a tool that provides alerts and remediation guidance when AWS is experiencing events that may affect you

^a364e9

> [!note] AWS Support
> AWS Support is a resource that can answer questions about best practices and assist with troubleshooting issues

^04b3e0

> [!note] AWS Support Plans
> AWS offers 4 [support](#^04b3e0) plans for different customers.
> - Basic: free for everyone; provides access to documentation, white papers, and support communities; also support for increasing service limit and billing questions; [limited trusted advisor](2.7%20Monitoring%20and%20Analytics.md#^bd3f17) checks; a [personal health dashboard](2.8%20Pricing%20and%20Support.md#^a364e9);
> - Developer: everything in basic plus direct email access to customer support with a 24-hour response time and 12-hour response time when the system is impaired;
> - Business: everything above plus phone access to support teams with 4-hour response time when the system is impaired and 1-hour response time when the production system is down; access to **infrastructure event management** to plan for massive events such as new launches and ad campaigns for a fee;
> - Enterprise:
> 	- Enterprise on-ramp: everything above plus a 30-minute response time for business-critical workloads and access to [TAMs](#^140628);
> 	- Enterprise support: a 15-minute response time for business and mission-critical workloads and a designated TAM. Your TAM will proactively monitor your environment and assist with optimization. AWS Enterprise Support also includes access to *proactive reviews, *workshops*, and *deep dives*.

^4d62d7

> [!summary] Technical Account Managers
> Technical Account Managers are a team of AWS experts who provide proactive guidance and coordinate access to programs and AWS experts as needed. They provide infrastructure event management, Well-Architected reviews, and operations reviews. 
> 
> In [Enterprise On-Ramp](#^4d62d7), your engagement with TAMs is rate limited, whereas rate limits don’t apply in [AWS Enterprise Support](#^4d62d7).

^140628

> [!summary] Well-Architected Reviews
> [TAMs](#^140628) conduct for you well-Architected reviews that check your AWS architecture against the six pillars of the Well-Architected Framework: Operational Excellence, Security, Reliability, Performance Efficiency, Cost Optimization, and Sustainability. 

## AWS Marketplace

> [!note] AWS Marketplace
> AWS Marketplace is a digital catalog that includes thousands of software listings from independent software vendors. You can use AWS Marketplace to find, test, and buy software that runs on AWS. The softwares offer different prices and amount of customer support.
> 
> The softwares are categorized into Infrastructure Software, DevOps, Data Products, Professional Services, Business Applications, Machine Learning, Industries, and Internet of Things (IoT).

