# Cloud Essentials - Migration and Innovation

[AWS Learning Resources](AWS%20Learning%20Resources.md)
[Source](https://explore.skillbuilder.aws/learn/course/134/play/99519/aws-cloud-practitioner-essentials;lp=82)

## AWS Cloud Adoption Framework

> [!note] AWS Cloud Adoption Framework
> AWS CAF provides guidance on moving on-premise application to the cloud in 6 perspectives:
> - **Business**: ensure cloud adoption aligns with business needs; 
> - **People**: ensure people with the right skills are hired for running business on the cloud;
> - **Governance**: understand how to update the staff skills and processes necessary to ensure business governance in the cloud. Manage and measure cloud investments to evaluate business outcomes;
> - **Platform**: design the architecture to migrate existing applications to the cloud;
> - **Security**: ensures that the organization meets security objectives for visibility, auditability, control, and agility;
> - **Operations**: plan operational procedures to conduct business successfully on the cloud.
> - 
> The top 3 are business perspectives, while the bottom 3 are technology perspectives.
> 
> These inputs are then used as the basis for creating what is called an **AWS Cloud Adoption Framework Action Plan** that you then use to guide your organization's change management as you journey to the cloud.

^8eae64

## Migration Strategies

> [!note] Migration Strategies
> When choosing which strategy to use, consider time, cost, priority, and criticality.
> 
> - **Rehosting**: life and shift; take existing application and move to the cloud;
> - **Replatforming**: lift, tinker, and shift; take existing application, optimize for cloud, and move to the cloud. No core code changes;
> - **Retiring**: some applications are not needed on the cloud;
> - **Retaining**: for applications that will retire soon, keep them on-premise until they retire;
> - **Repurchasing**: change software provider to cloud options;
> - **Refactoring**: write new code to take advantage of cloud features.

> [!note] AWS MigrationHub
> Migration Hub is a service that helps plan and track application migrations.

> [!note] AWS Application Migration Service
> AWS MGN is an automated lift-and-shift solution. This solution can migrate physical servers and any databases or applications that run on them to EC2 instances in AWS.

> [!note] AWS Application Discovery Service
> Application Discovery Service collects information about the usage and configuration of on-premises servers to help plan a migration to AWS.

## AWS Snowfamily

> [!note] AWS Snowfamily
> The Snowfamily are physical devices to transport data for migration to the cloud. They also come with compute capabilities for edge locations with limited computing power.
> 
> AWS owns and manages the Snow Family devices and integrates with AWS security, monitoring, storage management, and computing capabilities. 
> 
> > [!info] Snowcone
> > The Snowcones contain 2 CPUs, 4 GB of memory, and up to 14 TB of usable storage;
> 
> > [!info] Snowball
> > The Snowballs come in two sizes, storage optimized and compute optimized.
> > 
> > Storage optimized:
> > -  Storage: 80 TB of hard disk drive (HDD) capacity for block volumes and Amazon S3 compatible object storage, and 1 TB of SATA solid state drive (SSD) for block volumes. 
> > - Compute: 40 vCPUs, and 80 GiB of memory to support Amazon EC2 sbe1 instances (equivalent to C5).
> > 
> > Compute optimized:
> > - Storage: 80-TB usable HDD capacity for Amazon S3 compatible object storage or Amazon EBS compatible block volumes and 28 TB of usable NVMe SSD capacity for Amazon EBS compatible block volumes. 
> > - Compute: 104 vCPUs, 416 GiB of memory, and an optional NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU. Devices run Amazon EC2 sbe-c and sbe-g instances, which are equivalent to C5, M5a, G3, and P3 instances.
> 
> > [!info] Snowmobile
> > The Snowmobiles are giant devices transported by a truck capable of transporting 100 Pb of data.
> 
> For all the options, the hardware and software are cryptographically signed, and all data stored is automatically encrypted using 256-bit encryption keys, owned and managed by you, the customer. You can even use [AWS KMS](2.6%20Security%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^645231) to generate and manage keys.

## Innovation with AWS

> [!note] VMware on AWS
> VMware on AWS allows you to take existing VMware infrastructure on premise and deploy AWS.

> [!note] Amazon SageMaker
> Amazon SageMaker is AWS's tool for quickly building, training, and deploying machine learning models at scale.

> [!note] Amazon Augmented AI
> Amazon Augmented AI (Amazon A2I) provides built-in human review workflows for common machine learning use cases, such as content moderation and text extraction from documents. With Amazon A2I, a person can also create their own workflows for machine learning models built on Amazon SageMaker or any other tools.

> [!note] Amazon Lex
> Amazon Lex is used to build interactive AI chatbots, like Alexa.

> [!note] Amazon Textract
> Amazon Textract is used to extract text from scanned pages.

> [!note] Amazon DeepRacer
> Amazon DeepRacer is a physical racetrack with small cars to test reinforcement learning.

> [!note] AWS IoT
> AWS IoT offers tools for internet-of-things technology.

> [!note] Amazon GroundStation
> AWS GroundStation offers access to satellites. You pay for the amount of time you use the satellite.

## Other Amazon Services

> [!note] Amazon Fraud Detector
> The Amazon Fraud Detector allows you to detect potentially fraudulent online activities.

> [!note] AWS Quick Starts
> AWS Quick Starts automates the deployment of workloads into an AWS environment.

> [!note] Amazon EventBridge
> Amazon EventBridge is a [serverless](2.2%20Compute%20in%20the%20Cloud.md#^173173) event bus that ingests data from your own apps, SaaS apps, and AWS services and routes that data to targets.

^7ceb14

> [!note] Amazon Connect
> Amazon Connect is an omnichannel cloud contact center. Amazon Connect helps you provide customer service at a low cost. Amazon Connect uses an omnichannel design to provide a seamless experience across voice and chat for your customers and agents.

> [!note] AWS CodeArtifact
> CodeArtifact is a managed artifact repository service that stores and shares software that is ready for deployment.

> [!note] AWS CodeBuild
> CodeBuild is a service that helps users to automatically compile source code, run unit tests, and produce software packages that are ready for deployment.

> [!note] AWS CodePipeline
> CodePipeline is a service that manages the movement of code between the individual services.

> [!note] AWS CodeCommit
> CodeCommit is a source code version control service. CodeCommit helps users store and manage developers' source code in AWS.

> [!note] AWS CodeGuru
> A machine learning-powered developer tool that provides automated code reviews and identifies performance optimizations

> [!note] AWS Cloud Map
> AWS Cloud Map creates and maintains a map of backend services.

> [!note] Amazon Transcribe
> Amazon Transcribe is a service that uses machine learning to convert audio data to text.

> [!note] Amazon Polly
> Amazon Polly is a machine learning service that converts text to speech.

> [!note] Amazon Translate
> Amazon Translate is a machine learning language translation service.





