# Getting Started with Cloud Acquisition

[AWS Learning Resources](AWS%20Learning%20Resources.md)
[Source](https://explore.skillbuilder.aws/learn/course/1575/play/5240/getting-started-with-cloud-acquisition;lp=82)

## Considerations for purchasing

> [!info] Selling a Single Model
> At Amazon Web Services (AWS), we sell a single model to millions of customers. In traditional legacy IT procurement, you would set your own unique requirements, and then ask interested suppliers to build and price bespoke solutions to meet those needs. Cloud procurement is different because of the one-to-many nature of cloud services. This means that you have to buy services as is and are responsible for either:
> - Building or tailoring these services to meet your needs
> - Getting the AWS Partner Network (APN) to do this for you

> [!info] Separating Infrastructure from Services and Labor
> Cloud technology and labor services can be provided by Partners or other third parties as one comprehensive solution, or purchased separately. Cloud technology should be regarded as a separate service with distinct roles and responsibilities, service-level agreements, and terms and conditions.

> [!info] Four Factors to Consider for Purchasing
> - Pricing
> - Security
> - Governance (Cloud management)
> - Terms and conditions

> [!note] Amazon Partner Network
> The APN is a network of business who use AWS to build solutions for customers. They often have more flexible terms and more custom solutions.

^042421

## Migration Planning

> [!note] Agile Approach
> The Agile Program plans for workstreams in the readiness and planning phase.
> - Structure your work in the form of epics and stories to be able to respond to change.
> - Produce a well-prioritized backlog.
> - Report your progress.
> - Build a migration roadmap to tie business stakeholder needs to technology initiatives.

> [!note] Sprints
> The sprint is for the implementation phase.
> - Learn by doing. Align, enable, and mobilize a workforce and resources.
> - Start small, create early successes, and build to full migration capacity.
> - Capture outputs, best practices, and lessons learned to use as building blocks for migrations at scale.
> - Create blueprints of agile delivery for scaling migrations based on Wave 1 (the initial wave of migrations with 10 to 30 applications). These blueprints can then be used as a foundation for the readiness and planning migration phase.

> [!note] AWS Incentives
> AWS provides a range of incentives to customers to support and accelerate their cloud adoption. 
> 
> The [AWS CAF](2.9%20Migration%20and%20Innovation.md#^8eae64) identifies common cloud migration activities and best practices to optimize your migrations and cloud adoption outcomes. The **AWS Professional Services** (ProServe) team works with customers to create an [action plan](2.9%20Migration%20and%20Innovation.md#^8eae64). The AWS CAF action plan helps you to:
> - Prepare for the transition to cloud-based IT.
> - Uncover gaps in your existing skills and processes.
> - Guide management as you transition to the cloud.
> 
> The **AWS Cloud Adoption Readiness Tool** (CART) helps customers develop efficient and effective plans for cloud adoption and enterprise cloud migrations. This 16-question online survey and assessment report details cloud migration readiness across six perspectives, including business, people, process, platform, operations, and security.  
>   
> After you complete a CART survey, you can download a customized **cloud migration assessment**. This includes a heatmap and radar chart with detailed scoring information and resources to help you improve your readiness score. This takeaway report will help you plan and communicate with stakeholders.

> [!note] AWS Migration Partners
> AWS Migration Competency Partners help you through every stage of migration, accelerating results by providing personnel, tools, and education in the form of professional services. These Partners are, or have a relationship with, an AWS audited Managed Service Provider to help you with ongoing support of AWS workloads. 
> 
> In order for our [APN](#^042421) partners to achieve the AWS Migration Partner designation, we have assessed their:
> - Skills and expertise to help enterprise customers migrate applications and legacy infrastructure to AWS
> - Completion of multiple large-scale migrations to AWS
