# Introduction

[0. UvA SBiP](Biology/UvA%20Systems%20Biology%20in%20Practice/0.%20UvA%20SBiP.md)

## Learning objectives

- Acquire insight in mechanisms underlying _regulation and adaptation_ of microbial organisms.  
- Get acquainted with interdisciplinary approach
	- Transcriptome analysis  
	- Proteome analysis  
	- Microbial physiology  
- Learn to integrate data from multiple sources and experiments  
- Learn to design follow up experiments

## Molecular microbial physiology

- Develop:
	- systems biology tools
	- synthetic biology tools
	- automated cultivation devices
- Field of interest
	- cyanobacteria
	- stable production of $C$ compounds
	- evolutionary strategies

## Background

### Definition of research theme

- how to organisms cope with different environments?
- [A single microbial species can catalyze different macro-chemical reactions and has select one](Biology/VU%20Basic%20Models%20of%20Biological%20Networks/13.%20VU%20BMBN%20Phenomenological%20Models%20for%20Ecology%20and%20Cell%20Biology.md#A%20single%20microbial%20species%20can%20catalyze%20different%20macro-chemical%20reactions%20and%20has%20select%20one)
- The organism senses the signal and responds to it
	- physiological responses (phenotypic characterization)
	- underlying mechanisms
		- RNA (transcriptomics)
		- protein (proteomics)
		- metabolite (metabolomics)

### Cyanobacteria

- little green bugs
- photosynthetic
- PCC6803, a model cyanobacteria
	- relatively fast growth rate
	- genome sequenced in 1997
	- many tools for metabolic engineering
	- [Genome Scaled Metabolic Model](LCMS/Genome%20Scaled%20Metabolic%20Model.md)
	- growth models
	- still many unknowns

### Ploidy

- Number of complete sets of chromosomes per cell
- Eukaryotes: poly, oligo, and diploidy is very common
- Prokaryotes:
	- Mero-oligoploidy: E. Coli. carries 1 set of chromosome when growth rate is low; at higher rates, initiation of replication begins before the previous round of replication has ended
- _Synechocystis_ ploidy
	- The group studying this organism made a mistake in counting its ploidy at first and corrected 5 years later
	- Easy to make a mistake in counting ploidy

### Why study ploidy

- Why is polyploidy conserved?
	- Evolvability: more exploration of the sequence landscape because there are multiple copies and backups
	- Storage: storing phosphate in the DNA
	- Resistance to desiccation (drought)
- Is ploidy level regulated?
	- Cell cycle signaling?
	- DNA replication control? Does it cost energy to limit or promote DNA replication?
- Can we use ploidy to speed up segregation?
	- A mutation happens and it changes its offspring
	- When there is ploidy, so 1 out of 20 copies is affected
	- How does this affect segregation in the offsprings?

### Organisms adapt to environment changes

- Phosphate is important for cyanobacteria and is also scarce in nature
- Studying how cells react to changes in phosphate availability can help us understand better the physiology of these organisms
	- Storage compounds, ploidy level, etc
- At the industry level, understanding how cells react to different nutrient concentrations (surplus or limitations) is important
	- Changes in storage compounds
	- Medium optimization

## Experiment plan

### Research question

> How does organism adapt to environment?
> Why are organisms polyploid?

- Which organism to study? 
- How do different environmental cues affect polyploidy?

> How does phosphate influence the cellular composition of _Synechocystis_ PCC. 6803?

- What parameters to vary?
	- Phosphate concentration
	- Growth rate
- What to measure?
	- Phosphate level
	- Ploidy level
	- Look at internal machinery (-omics)

### Reality check

- How much sample volume is needed?
- How much time does it take?
- special equipment needed
- what is the cost

> Mentioned in lecture: antibiotics are dissolved in ethanol. Ethanol can change the cell behavior but it appears like antibiotics did.

### The experiment

- 2 phosphate conditions: low phosphate limits growth
	- low phosphate (0.0115 mM)
	- normal phosphate (0.23 mM)
- Determine ploidy level
- Internal machinery (omics measurements)

### Parameters to control

- Phosphate concentration
- Nutrient concentration
- Light availability
- Biomass concentration
- Growth rate

### Turbidostat: monitors biomass concentration

- Biomass is monitored to be kept constant
- Monitor optical density
- When biomass accumulates
	- Dilute (add fresh medium)
	- Remove cells

### Comparing conditions

- light also controls the growth rate
- The bacteria can be phosphate limited and light limited
- Photonfluxostat: a method for light-limited batch cultivation of cyanobacteria at different yet constant growth rates

### How to measure ploidy

- Spectroscopy (Nanodrop)
- Fluorescence spectroscopy
- FACS
- **qPCR**

### qPCR

1. Count and break cells
2. Amplify specific fragment using primers and DNA polymerase
3. Measure fluorescence of newly synthesized double stranded DNA fragments
4. Calculate amount of DNA fragments per cell

- Calculate:
	- how many cycles of PCR does it take to achieve a fluorescence level: the more copies there are, the faster it is

### The plan

- 6 independent biological samples
	- 3 phosphate limited
	- 3 light limited
	- 3 technical replicates

| Variable                  | Technique                          |
| ------------------------- | ---------------------------------- |
| Biomass                   | Optical density (OD), cell counter |
| Ploidy level              | qPCR                               |
| mRNA expression levels    | Transcriptomics                    |
| protein expression levels | Proteomics                         |

### The multi-cultivator

- Supports 8 independent _bioreactors_
- LED panel providing white _light_
- Gas bubbles _aerate_ and _mix_ culture
- Automated with custom software

### Experimental set up

| Multi-cultivator | 1   | 2   | 3   | 4   | 5   | 6   | 7   | 8   |
| ---------------- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Strain           | WT  | WT  | WT  | WT  | WT  | WT  | WT  | WT  |
| Limitation       | P   | P   | P   | P   | L   | L   | L   | L   |
P: phosphate
L: light

### Bigger scheme

- Phosphate limited vs. light limited
- 3 replicates per condition (+1 just in case)
- Study:
	- microbial physiology
	- transcriptomics
	- proteomics

## Data analysis

- semi-processed datasets
- example figures are provided
- bring the analysis further or show different aspects of the data

### Microbial physiology data

- Take samples from each channel of [The multi-cultivator](#The%20multi-cultivator)
- Analyze in:
	- **Bench spectrophotometer **(OD): `spectrophotometer.csv`
	- **CASY counter** (with and without cell extract protocol for cell number): `casy.csv`
	- **qPCR** (after cell extraction): `qpcr.csv`
	- **turbidostat** (automated multi-cultivator measurements): `turbidostat.csv`
-  Calculate:
	- **pigment composition**: should change in different light conditions, a sanity check, from spectrophotometer OD data
	- **growth rate**: from turbidostat OD data
		- measured with 730 nm so cell counting peak does not fall over pigment peaks
	- **ploidy**: from CASY counter, qPCR

### Data format

- Canvas: ./data/ folder:  
	- `design`: match culture ID (channel) to experimental conditions  
	- `spectrophotometer`: OD measurements at different wavelengths from the spectrophotometer  
	- `turbidostat`: automated OD720 measurements from Multi-cultivator  
	- `casy`: cell count data from CASY-counter  
	- `qPCR`: Ct values from quantitative PCR

