# JS Variables

> [JS](JS.md)

Variables are containers for storing data

## Automatic declaring

Variables can be declared automatically when first used, but it is not a good practice in JS.

``` js
x = 5;
y = 6;
z = x + y;
```

## Declaring using keywords

``` js
const price1 = 5;  
const price2 = 6;  
let total = price1 + price2;
```

## When to use var, let, and const

1. Always declare variables
2. Always use `const` if the value should not be changed
3. Always use `const` if the type should not be changed (Arrays and Objects)
4. Only use `let` if you can't use `const`
5. Only use `var` if you MUST support old browsers.
	1. `let` and `const` were introduced later in the history of JS
	2. `var` has been in all JS versions

## Declaring and assigning variables

Declaring and assigning can happen sequentially or at the same time:

``` js
// Sequentially
let x;
x = 5;
// At the same time
let x = 5;
```

It is good practice in JS to declare all variables at the beginning of the script.

##  Declaring multiple variables

``` js
let person = "John Doe", carName = "Volvo", price = 200;
```

It can span multiple lines

``` js
let person = "John Doe", 
	carName = "Volvo", 
	price = 200;
```

## Undefined

When a variable is declared without assignment, it has the value "undefined"

``` js
let x;
```

## Redeclaring

Redeclaring a variable does not erase its value

``` js
var a = 5;
var a;
// a is still 5
```

> [!warning]
> Does not work with `let` and `const`. They cannot be redeclared.

## JS Arithmetic

Variables can be declared with arithmetic operations

``` js
let x = 1 + 2 + 3;
```

> [!warning]
> When letters are mixed with numbers, the order is important

``` js
x = "5" + 2 + 1; // returns 521 as a string
y = 1 + 2 + "5"; // returns 35 as a string
```

## Unique Characters

`$` is treated as a letter, and can be put at the beginning of [identifiers](5.%20JS%20Syntax.md#^23c4e7).

> [!info]
> `$` is also used as an alias for the main function in a JavaScript library.
> 
> In the JavaScript library jQuery, for instance, the main function `$` is used to select HTML elements. In jQuery `$("p");` means "select all p elements".

`_` is also treated as a letter and can be put at the beginning of [identifiers](5.%20JS%20Syntax.md#^23c4e7).

> [!info]
> `_` is often used as an alias for private (hidden) variables.


