# Mutation, Evolution, and Sequence Alignment

Same topic as [2. MIT CompBio - Dynamic Programming](2.%20MIT%20CompBio%20-%20Dynamic%20Programming.md) and [3. MIT CompBio - Hashing, Database Search, BLAST algorithm](3.%20MIT%20CompBio%20-%20Hashing,%20Database%20Search,%20BLAST%20algorithm.md)
[0. VU FoB](0.%20VU%20FoB.md)

## Mutation

- Insertion/deletions: cause frame shifts
	- Inserting multiples of 3 does not cause frame shifts
	- Each codon is 3 nucleotides long
- Transitions and transversions
	- Transition: between purines or pyrimidines
	- Transversions: across purines and pyrimidines
- [Transitions are more likely than transversions](2.%20MIT%20CompBio%20-%20Dynamic%20Programming.md#Formulation%203%20Sequence%20alignment)

Mutation outcome:
- Synonymous mutations: the codon change does not change the amino acid translated.
- Non-synonymous mutations changes the amino acid and thus the protein.
	- Missense mutation: a mutation that changes an amino acid in the protein
	- Nonsense mutation: a mutation that changes an amino acid to a stop codon

## Evolution

- Convergent evolution: different species arrive at the same features in evolution, but evolved in different paths.
- Adaptive radiation/divergent evolution: homologous structure evolving into different forms.

### Homology

- sharing a common ancestor
- two homologous sequences are evolutionary related
- normally share function and structure

### Aligned sequences

- Aligned sequences are assumed to be from the same ancestor.
- For example, if two glycines are in the same location in the sequence, they are likely from the same ancestral species.
- Each item in a sequence is called a _residue_

## Sequence alignment

### Substitution matrix for amino acids

- Defines substitution cost scores
- PAM (Point of Accepted Mutation)
- BLOSUM (Block Substitution Matrix)
	- [BLOSUM62 Matrix](BLOSUM62%20Matrix.md)
	- Contain log odds ratios of amino acid substitutions

### Odds ratio and log odds

$$
\begin{aligned}
P_{success} &= P \\
P_{failure} &= 1-P \\
Odds &= \frac{P_{success}}{P_{failure}} \\
LogOdds &= \log(\frac{P}{1-P})\\
\end{aligned}
$$

Log odds
- 0 means 50% chance will happen
- Positive value means likely to appear
- Negative value means less likely to appear

Read the rest on [Dynamic Programming for Sequence Alignment](2.%20MIT%20CompBio%20-%20Dynamic%20Programming.md#Dynamic%20Programming%20for%20Sequence%20Alignment)

## BLAST

[The BLAST Algorithm and Inexact Matching](3.%20MIT%20CompBio%20-%20Hashing,%20Database%20Search,%20BLAST%20algorithm.md#The%20BLAST%20Algorithm%20and%20Inexact%20Matching)

- Basic Local Alignment Search Tool
- Alignment algorithm

### How it works

- Input: query sequence
- Database: contain many sequences to be matched
- Pigeonhole principal
- Break query into k-mers
- Extend to neighborhood of similarity
- Search through DB and store matrix
- Seed and extend local alignment

### Output

- Red -> Pink -> Green -> Blue -> Black: high score to low score hits
- Regions with long red hits across many species: conserved, mutations may be fatal.
- Regions with short other color hits or no hits: non-conserved, more tolerating for mutations.

### e value

- BLAST output is sorted by e-value, _the number of expected hits of similar quality (score) that could be found just by chance._
- The smaller, the better.
- Normalized alignment score: $S'=\frac{\lambda S - ln(K)}{ln(2)}$
- e value: $E = \frac{mn}{2^{-S'}}$, where m and n are sequences lengths.

### PSSM

- Position Specific Scoring Matrix (**PSSM**)
- An amino acids by sequence positions matrix.
- For each sequence position, we can indicate how likely it is a certain amino acid occurs. [Log odds](#Odds%20ratio%20and%20log%20odds) are calculated. 
	- If an amino acid is very likely to occur in a particular position, it has a high log odds ratio in that matrix element.

## PSI-BLAST

Sometimes, two sequences can have low _overall_ similarity but still be distantly related. In this case, they have conserved sequences in critical/highly conserved regions, but they are very different in other regions.

The different regions could originate from mutations accumulated over time or protein module rearrangements, but the conserved regions, which are structurally/functionally important, remain unchanged.

For PSI-BLAST, the PSSM is used as the score matrix instead of the BLOSUM matrix. The alignment score for each position in the sequence is calculated using the PSSM. 

Since the PSSM tells you how likely is an amino acid to appear in each position, the alignment score is high for those sequences with small but highly conserved regions (very high log ratios), thus finding the distantly related proteins.

## Distant homology searches

- Many more methods

## Profile-Sequence Searching



