# Machine Learning

Read [1. UDL Introduction](1.%20UDL%20Introduction.md)
[0. VU FoB](0.%20VU%20FoB.md)

## Hypothesis space

- Refers to the set of all possible hypotheses (or parameters) that could be chosen for a specific learning tasks.
- For example, for linear regression, it is the total set of linear equations that could fit the data. For SVM it is the total set of all possible hyperplanes. For decision trees it is the total set of all possible decision rules.
- ML finds a fitting hypotheses from the hypotheses space.

## Types

- Supervised
- Unsupervised
- Reinforced

## Workflow

- Preprocessing
	- Most of the work
	- Get raw data and labels
	- Build training and testing dataset
		- Training: for training the model
		- Evaluate: for evaluating performance during training
		- Test: evaluate performance
- Learning
- Evaluation
	- Under-fitted
	- Good fit
	- Overfit
- Prediction

### Random forest

- Allows interpreting the model
- Can remove feature by feature, retrain the model, and see the results -> feature selection.

## Naive Bayes Classification

See also: [MLE vs. Bayesian Parameter Estimation](MLE%20vs.%20Bayesian%20Parameter%20Estimation.md)

- Applications
	- Spam filter
	- User classification
	- Sentiment analysis

### Spam filter

- Calculate probability of the email being spam or normal
- Data: spam emails and normal emails
- Calculate: $P('money'|spam)$: probability of seeing the word 'money'; get by counting words
- $P(spam|'money') = \frac {P(spam)\cdot P('money'|spam)}{P(money)}$
- In training, count the frequency of the words in the email, like money, hi, promotion, discount, friend, etc.
- Steps:
- **Naive** because it assumes probability of each word is independent from each other, which does not accurately reflect the reality.

## Neural network



### Protein folding

- Why still necessary to learn how proteins actually fold: 
	- For Alzheimer's Disease, a protein ($\beta$-amyloid) misfolds and exposes a hydrophobic region. Understanding how it happens helps treat it.