# Sequencing

[0. VU FoB](0.%20VU%20FoB.md)

## Sanger sequencing

[Youtube Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X9566yI2cBo)

### Reagents

- primer: used to start DNA synthesis.
- DNA polymerase: synthesizes DNA with dNTP or ddNTP
- deoxyribonucleoside triphosphate (dNTP): the normal A, T, G, C that can be used to synthesize DNA.
	- Among them, the dATP is labeled with a radioactive dye. This is used later to view the location of the sequence in the gel.
- dideoxyribonucleoside triphosphate (ddNTP): the terminating variant of A, T, G, and C. DNA polymerase cannot add more nucleotides if a ddNTP is added to the chain.
- DNA template: DNA to be sequenced

### Steps of the original Sanger sequencing

Sanger sequencing uses the **chain termination** method:
1. Heat the DNA template to 100 ℃ to separate the DNA into single strands. This also inactivates any DNA polymerase originally in the sample solution.
2. Cool the mixture down to 67 ℃ to allow the primers to bind.
3. Add DNA polymerase, 4 types of dNTPs, and 1 type of ddNTP. So there are 4 tubes in total, 1 for each ddNTP. The concentration of ddNTP is much lower compared to that of the dNTPs.
4. Let the reaction proceed. The ddNTPs will be incorporated into the sequence at random, creating sequences that terminate at different lengths.
5. The sequences are mixed with a loading dye. Then they are run through a polyacrylamide gel. Depending on the length of the sequences, they end up in different locations. The loading dye tells when the sequences have reached the end of the gel.
6. The gel is dried on a piece of paper. The locations of the sequences are detected using X-ray film with the radioactive dATPs.
7. From the bottom to the top, the nucleotides are read. This is called **base calling**. For example, if the lowest sequence terminates with a ddATP, the second lowest terminates with a ddGTP, then the first two nucleotides are `AG`. This method allows sequencing of about 200 nucleotides.

### Improvement using fluorescent dye

Fluorescently labeled primers replace radioactive dATPs. The primers are colored in 4 colors, 1 for each ddNTP. After the polymerization reactions, the sequences can be loaded in the same lane of gel. Then base calling are done from the bottom to the top. The colors indicates the terminating ddNTP.

## Illumina sequencing (NGS)

[Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fCd6B5HRaZ8)

Short sequencing technique

Sequencing by synthesis: each added nucleotide is excited with energy to emit light

### Steps

1. **Sample preparation**: sequencing binding sites, sample identifiers, and regions complementary to the flow cell oligos are added to the sequence through reduced cycle amplification.
2. **Clustering**: each sequence is isothermally amplified on the flow cell. 
	1. There are two types of oligos on the flow cell. The sequences bind to 1 type of oligos first.
	2. A polymerase creates a complementary strand from the oligos of the flow cell.
	3. The original strand is washed off.
	4. Bridge amplification: how the newly synthesized strands are amplified. The other end of the strands bind to the other type of oligos on the flow cell, and a complementary strand is synthesized, forming a bridge between two oligos. Then the two strands are denatured. They then bind to other empty oligos and make more copies.
	5. The reverse strands are cleaved and washed off, leaving only copies of forward strands. The 3' end of the sequence is protected to prevent unwanted priming.
3. **Sequencing**:
	1. The forward strand is sequenced, aka. **first read**. Then nucleotides are added sequentially to the growing strand. After adding each nucleotide, a light source excites a fluorescent light from the nucleotides. The emitted light is captured by a camera to record which nucleotide is added. 
	2. The first read product is washed off. Then the index strand is sequenced with a index primer. After sequencing, the index read product and the primer are washed off.
	3. The 3' end is deprotected.
	4. The template bends and binds to the other oligos on the flow cell. Index 2 is sequenced.
	5. The reverse strand is synthesized with the DNA polymerase.
	6. The 3' end is blocked again. The forward strand is washed away this time. Then the reverse strand is sequenced. Sequencing from both ends help resolve ambiguous alignments.
4. **Data processing**:
	1. Filtering out low quality reads
	2. Filtering out mixed clusters
	3. Other filtering
	4. Map to reference genome

> [!info] Why index 1 and 2 are read separately
> [Source](https://www.seqanswers.com/forum/sequencing-technologies-companies/illumina-solexa/65313-why-illumina-index-is-read-separately)
> To reduce error.
> Index 1 and 2 are information contained in the adaptors at the two ends of DNA.

> [!info] Why paired ends reading?
> [Source](https://www.biostars.org/p/314258/)
> This allows more accurate mapping, particularly of repetitive regions.

## Oxford Nanopore Sequencing

[Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qzusVw4Dp8w&t=143s)

Long sequencing technique: reads are from ten to hundreds of kilobases to 2 megabases depending on the preparation methods

A nanopore is a protein structure that forms gateways across membranes. It is embedded in a synthetic membrane bathed in a electrophysiological solution. An ionic current is passed through the nanopores. As the DNA strand runs through the pore, it disrupts the current through the pore. The nucleotides can be identified from the current disruptions. 

The data is real time. No need for PCR, avoiding amplification bias. Also easier to perform. High error rate.

## Sanger vs. NGS

|                               | Sanger                                                   | NGS                                                    |
| ----------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------ |
| Accuracy                      | 99.9% (Golden standard)                                  | 99-99.9%                                               |
| Cost Effectiveness            | < 20 samples                                             | > 20 samples                                           |
| Speed < 20 samples            | Fast                                                     | Slow                                                   |
| Speed > 20 samples            | Slow                                                     | Fast                                                   |
| Sensitivity (detection limit) | 15-20%                                                   | 1%                                                     |
| Sample coverage               | 1 read/sample, 300-850 base pairs, can be up to 2000 bps | billions of reads per sample, up to 16 Tb, 300-600 bps |

## Terminology

- Reads: small fragments of sequence
- Sequencing depth: how many times a nucleotide is sequenced.
- Sequencing coverage: how much of the original sequence is sequenced, expressed as the average depth of all the nucleotides.

## De Bruijn graphs of sequence alignment

[Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TNYZZKrjCSk)

After sequencing, reads are aligned to the reference genome.

What happens if no access to reference genome?

The seven bridges of Konigsberg: if there a paths through the city that cross all 7 bridges.

Finding an Eulerian path through the bridges requires graph theory.

The De Bruijn Graph is made of nodes and edges:
- Nodes are k-mers  
- Edges are (k+1)-mers, connecting two nodes  
- Such nodes need to have an overlap of (k-1) symbols  
- Directed edges, such that the suffix of the outgoing node overlaps with the prefix of the incoming node

Repeats lead to errors and ambiguity.
- Extend length of k-mers
- Compare coverage of divergent alignments
- Use long sequencing techniques

## Genome assembly

[Source](https://timkahlke.github.io/LongRead_tutorials/APP_MET.html#:~:text=The%20N50%20is%20related%20to,in%20the%20set%20of%20sequences.)

### Contig

- Assembly output: (many) contigs  
- Contigs are longer than the reads, but shorter than the full genome  
- The sequence order of the different contigs is unkown
### N50

N50 measure:  The N50 is **related to the median and mean length of a set of sequences**. Its value represents the length of the shortest read in the group of longest sequences that together represent (at least) 50% of the nucleotides in the set of sequences.

Example: Six reads of length 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. The combined length is 81 nucleotides and 50% = 40.5 nucleotides.

To get the N50 value start at the longest read and add the length of the next shorter one until you reach (at least) 50% of the total number of nucleotides:

```
	16 + 15 + 14 = 45
```

The N50 value of this set of sequences is 14.

### PHRED score

Phred scores are a measure of the **quality of a sequencer’s base calling**. It represents the logarithmic probability of a sequencing error for each nucleotide. Phred scores (Q) in a fastq file are represented as [ASCII](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ASCII) text to be able to assign one character to each nucleotide.

