# Scientific Writing

[0. VU FoB](0.%20VU%20FoB.md)

## Important considerations

### Understand your audience

- Prior knowledge
- Important for oral communication

### Be complete

- Reproducibility
- Describe all the _relevant_ steps

### Be concise

- Don't use unnecessary words

### Be clear

- One main point
- Highlight the important parts
- Use a clear structure tell a story
- In figures: highlight the important information

### Be precise

- Give quantities and references for statements

## Recipe for the paper

General structure:
- Abstract
- Introduction
- Materials and methods
- Results
- Discussion
- References

### Recipe for abstract


### Introduction

Aim: introduce and state the research question
Field domain
What field knows
Gap
What we did
Results

### Methods

Be complete with details.

### Results

One line summary of results as sub-titles.

### Figures

- Each figure needs a caption,
- Explain all axes, labels, lines, points, in the caption of your figure/table.
- Refer to each figure in the main text, and explain what can be seen from the figure/table.
- Often each figure corresponds to one subsection in the results.
- Write results by describing a figure.

### Discussion

- Clearly state the research question you have answered in the paper.
- Discuss any issues that may affect the results.
- Put results in the context of the field again.

## Writing tips

- Use a thesaurus: repeating words is boring, but keep technical terms consistent.
- Passive voice: avoid using it unnecessarily. Sometimes it it ok to use "we" as the subject.

### Writing process

- Start with the methods, then results.
- Make figures early.
- Start writing an outline.
	- One point per paragraph.
	- 'Recipes' can help structure this.
- Do not aim for a perfect first draft.
- If you're in a flow, continue and fill in details/references later.