# VU ISB Practical 1

[0. VU Introduction to Systems Biology](0.%20VU%20Introduction%20to%20Systems%20Biology.md)

1.  The European Space Agency (ESA) has asked you to design a probe that will look for signs of life in another planet. What will your probe search for?  
	1. Water
	2. Amino acids
2.  The function of a protein depends on it’s three dimensional structure, but knowing how a protein folds in 3D is a complex problem. Do you see any way trying to predict a protein function from its sequence? 
	1. Process it like a sequence of words. Given an amino acid and its surroundings, use ML model to learn what neighbors frequently binds with it.
	2. Make predictions on new amino acid sequences. 
	3. Check existing proteins
3.  Enzymes help to perform chemical reactions. Would a higher  concentration of an enzyme lead to a faster rate for its associated the  reaction? Why or why not?  
	1. Yes. When there are a lot of reactants. If there is only one enzyme, they would line up for using the enzyme, thus bottlenecking the reaction rate.
4. “The shape of a protein must be uniquely defined by its sequence”, this is known as the Anfinsen's dogma, and was proposed in 1961, before most of our knowledge of how proteins fold. Without going into chemistry, and using what you have learned in the class today, why do you think this must be (mostly) true? Why is it not exactly true?
	1. The protein must be the same each time it is translated using the same RNA code. Since RNA code translates directly into AA code, it must define the structure of proteins.
	2. However, this does not account for post-translational modifications.
5. Imagine you have a process, with a variable rate, that is making a product A. Another process is also consuming A. For some reason, it is very important that you keep the concentration of A as stable as possible.If you have complete control over the production of A, how would you design a controller that keeps the concentration of A stable? What would you need to measure, and what would you need to influence. Do you think the mechanism you described above could be done only using molecular interactions?  
    1. Let's say Z produces A produces B, B could start another reaction that creates an inhibitor for Z.
6. You’ve seen that the translation process in prokaryotes involves the RNA polymerase with a bound sigma-factor, which is unbound after transcription begins. Having two molecules involved in this process increases its complexity, which can lead to a higher failure rate. Can you think why is it advantageous to have these two be separate molecules? Multiple different genes can use the same sigma-factor, can you think of an advantage of not having each gene with one specific factor?  
		1. High failure rate is not necessarily bad. It gives strict criteria for success, which is easier to control. Increasing and decreasing sigma factor levels is also cheaper than making a giant complex.
		2. Higher efficiency in controlling.
7. Antarctic notothenioid fish avoid freezing in their perpetually icy environment because of an antifreeze protein that circulates in their blood. This evolutionary adaptation has allowed them to rise to dominance in the Southern Ocean. Can you speculate how an antifreeze protein would work? What molecule could it bind to? 
	1. Binds to small ice crystals and stop it from forming larger crystals.
8. Look up “codon tables” in your favorite online encyclopedia. Now consider the following RNA sequence: AGUCUAGGCAUGA. What are all the possible ways to translate it into a sequence of amino acids? Which way can be part of a protein?  Boring
9. True or False: The difference in the patterns of proteins produced in different specialized cells are accurately reflected in the pattern of expressed mRNA. Not really. Many things happen between mRNA and translation. Hence the reason for proteomics.
10. Predicting the number of ribosomes and amino-acid transporters of a proteomics experiment. The models we will make later in the class, will make those predictions for all cellular proteins. A bacterial protein consists on average out of 325 amino acids. 
	1. How many nucleotides long are its mRNA and DNA?  325\*3+3
	2. Protein synthesis by a ribosome occurs at a rate of 11 amino acids per second. How much time does it take a ribosome to make a single protein?  325/11
	3. A cell contains about a million protein molecules in total. If it makes this number of proteins in one hour. How many ribosomes does it require?  Just do unit conversions, 8203.
	4. The generation time of a cell equals the time that it takes to double all its molecular content. Here we focus only on proteins. Plot the required ribosomes to double 1 million proteins in one generation time, as function of the generation time.  $y=\frac{1}{x}\cdot k$, where $x$ is time, $y$ is ribosomes.
	5. Estimate the number of ammonium transporters a cell needs, given that:  same unit conversions, 10670
		1. The cell’s generation time (1 hour),  
		2. The cell’s protein content (1 million),  
		3. Protein consist of amino acids (325) and amino acids consist of nitrogen (say 1.3 per amino acid)  
		4. Ammonium is the nitrogen source.  
		5. One ammonium transport protein can import 10 ammonium molecules per second.  
	6. Plot the required ammonium transporters to double 1 million proteins in one generation time, as function of the generation time. Same as before.
