# VU ISB Practical 2

[0. VU Introduction to Systems Biology](0.%20VU%20Introduction%20to%20Systems%20Biology.md)

## Can a biologist fix a radio

[Interesting read](can_a_biologist_fix_a_radio.pdf)

- What are the tunable parts in cells and organisms? Why would research on such components not be so promising.
	- Tunable parts: cell cycle rate, energy consumption rate, size of the cell, body temperature, etc.
	- They do not act independently. You change the volume of radio, only the volume changes. Things are more complicated in a cell or organism.
- Why can engineers fix a radio, according to the author?
	- They use a quantitative and formal language that allows a systematic way of solving a problem.
- Difference between engineers and biologists?
	- Considering the paper was written in 2002, many things have changed. Now in silico models are more widely applied. We also have databases using a common standard.
	- It is still true to some extent. Often we do not see published papers giving a quantitative description of its conclusions.
- Why was the systems approach not used before?
	- Computers and the ease of access to learning to code.
	- Experimental approach has proven to be useful.

## Key principles for understanding dynamic systems

> The state space, state transitions, evolutions, dynamics, and stationary states.

### Dynamic systems

- A dynamic system is something that has a definable state and changes in state with time according to some evolution law.
- Examples: a flying plane, a folding protein, a chemical reaction network, a human playing a game of chess

Question: 
1. What are the axes of the state space in those four cases? The variables of the system?
	1. Altitude, speed, fuel level, shape, the number of working engines
	2. reaction kinetics, shape, folding stage
	3. molecules, coefficients, flux
	4. brain cell died, how much the human is sweating, body temperatures

### State transition

 $$f:s(t)\rightarrow s(t+dt)$$
- What is in $s(t)$: the values that define the current state.
- What would the evolution law for the four cases be: 
	- Aerodynamics, fluid mechanics of the air, thermodynamics (engine fuel efficiency)
	- Chemistry, hydrogen bonding rules, hydrophobic effects
	- Reaction kinetics
	- Chess rules
- 2, 3, 4 dependent on time. 1 could be repetitive if the plane flies another trip.



