# VU ISB Course Introduction

Course schedule changes after 3rd week. More lectures or something
[0. VU Introduction to Systems Biology](0.%20VU%20Introduction%20to%20Systems%20Biology.md)
## Aims

- Basics of cell biology
- Metabolism of E. Coli
- Mathematical modeling
- Computable
- Predict and metabolic engineering

## Basics of cell biology

**Cell function**: substrate -> product
- makes a copy of itself

3 **principles** of cell processes
- Need to follow the laws of physics; the most important is chemistry.
- Need to be efficient.
- Control of the process. Need to control the steps of cell processes.

## Basic chemistry

- Covalent: strong bonds
- Non-covalent bonds: weak individually, but together strong
	- Can be used to recognize patterns, like how the sigma factor recognizes promoter sequences by hydrogen bonds.

## Proteins

- A specific shape for another molecule to fit in to form covalent bonds
- "Lock and key" analogy
- Enzyme: proteins that speed up reactions. Two molecules binding to the same protein will bind to each other and react more easily.
	- Lowers activation energy for the reaction.
	- Enzymes control cell activities. Without enzymes, reactions almost never happen. This is a _switch_ for reactions.

## Central dogma

- DNA to RNA to protein
- DNA: ATGC
- RNA: AUGC; U: uracil, replaces T
- Amino acids: protein building blocks

## Protein structure

- Fold by electrostatic force generated by the amino acids.
	- Different side chains determine the strength of the bonds.
- Always fold into the same shape.

## Basics of metabolism

- Food -> small molecules (amino acids, nucleic acids, glucose) -> big molecules (proteins, DNA, polysaccharides)

## Transcription

### In prokaryotes

- Promoter engagement with RNA polymerase
	- sigma factor: a protein that binds to the polymerase and the DNA; only binds DNA at specific sequences ([Promoter](Promoter.md))
		- The sigma factor is different for each gene. Only binds to its target gene.
		- It can also initiate transcription for a set of genes that have a common function. In this case it is the same for all the proteins.
	- Binds to the 3' strand
- Initiation: separates DNA strands
- Elongation: synthesizes [mRNA](mRNA.md)
- Termination: leaves DNA

## Translation

- Codons: 3 nucleotides code for an amino acid.
- [tRNA](tRNA.md): links 3 nucleotides and an amino acid
- [mRNA](mRNA.md): contains the nucleotide code for protein
- tRNA inside ribosome
- tRNAs bind to the mRNA on one side, and amino acids form a sequence on the other side.
- Stop codon: translation stops.

## Transcription regulation

See also [Transcription Regulation](Transcription%20Regulation.md)

- Availability of sigma factors
- mRNA copy number
- mRNA degradation rate

## Metabolic network

- Example: glycolysis
- Availability of amino acids _controls_ the network.

## Goals

- Genome sclae stoichiometric model of metabolism
- EcoCyc databse
- Derive active metabolic network from proteomic and transcripiomic data
- Engineer a bacteria cell
- Find a metabolic drug target with a genome scale stoichiometric model
- Biochemical and mathematic al concepts, programming in python