# Stoichiometric Model of Metabolism

[0. VU Introduction to Systems Biology](0.%20VU%20Introduction%20to%20Systems%20Biology.md)

## Chemistry review

- We are made from stardust💫
- No biological reaction can create new elements. They only rearrange the elements.
- [EcoCyc reactions](https://ecocyc.org/reaction?orgid=ECOLI&id=ASPARTASE-RXN)
- [EBI enzyme database](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pdbe/pdbe-kb/proteins/P0AC38)

### Stoichiometric coefficients

- Conservation of mass
- For example, the reaction below can be balanced by solving a system of linear equations $Ax=B$
$$
aC_6H_{12}O_6 + bO_2 \leftrightarrow cCO_2 + dH_2O
$$

First, turn the problem into a system of linear equations:
$$
\begin{aligned}
\mathrm{C\ balance:}&\ 6a=c\\
\mathrm{O\ balance:}&\ 6a+2b=2c+d\\
\mathrm{H\ balance:}&\ 12a=2d
\end{aligned}
$$
Then, turn it into matrix format:
$$
\begin{bmatrix}-6&0&1&0\\-6&-2&2&1\\-12&0&0&2\end{bmatrix}\cdot\begin{bmatrix}a\\b\\c\\d\end{bmatrix}=\mathbf{0}
$$
There are 3 equations for 4 unknowns, meaning there is 1 free variable. Reduce the matrix to row echelon form, set $d = 1$ to get $$\begin{aligned}a&=\frac{1}{6}\\b&=1\\c&=1\\d&=1\end{aligned}$$
Since we want integer coefficients, multiply them all by 6:$$\begin{aligned}a&=1\\b&=6\\c&=6\\d&=6\end{aligned}$$
The equation is: $$C_6H_{12}O_6 + 6O_2 \leftrightarrow 6CO_2 + 6H_2O$$

### Reaction rate

$$
v = \frac{E\ events\ in\ volume\ V\ and\ period\ dt}{V\ dt}
$$

The rate is proportional to the number of enzymes present and the amount of reactants.

### mol

$6 \times 10^{23}$ events or molecules = 1 mol of events or molecules.

1 $mol$ = $6 \times 10^{23}$

1 $Molar$ = 1 $M$ = 1 $mol/liter$, $10^{-3}\ mol$ = 1 $mM$, $10^{-6} = 1\ \mu M$  

$v = 3.2\ \frac{mol\ events}{liter\ time} = 3.2\ \frac{M}{hour} = 3.2\ M\ hour^{-1}$ (==concentration per time==) ^2de06f

## Stoichiometric model of metabolism

### Enzyme kinetics

- Enzyme kinetics dictates the the rate of enzyme-catalyzed reactions
- Example:
$$
v=\frac{k^+c_e\frac{c_ac_b}{K_AK_B}-k^-c_e\frac{c_pc_q}{K_PK_Q}}{\left(1+\frac{c_a}{K_A}+\frac{c_p}{K_P}\right)\left(1+\frac{c_b}{K_B}+\frac{c_q}{K_Q}\right)}
$$, where the $k$s and $K$s are kinetic constants.
- For next course

### Problem with stoichiometric model of metabolism

- It contains only the stoichiometric coefficients, not [Enzyme kinetics](#Enzyme%20kinetics).
- Therefore, they:
	- cannot predict concentrations of reactants, only [Reaction rate](#Reaction%20rate)
	- are limited to stationary states, cannot deal with dynamics
- Models that contain enzyme kinetics are dynamic models
	- contains stoichiometry and kinetics  
	- can calculate concentrations  
	- are defined as function of time, can deal with dynamics and stationary states  
	- topic of a next course

### E.C. Number

All metabolic enzymes are linked to a reaction equation that is elementally balanced (via an E.C.  Number)
• [ecocyc link to example](https://ecocyc.org/reaction?orgid=ECOLI&id=6PFRUCTPHOS-RXN)
• [ecocyc link to example](https://ecocyc.org/ECOLI/NEW-IMAGE?type=EC-NUMBER&object=EC-2.7.1.11)
• [EC Number explanation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enzyme_Commission_number)
• [List of EC Numbers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_enzymes)

Since metabolic reactions are very universal, they are not named according to their species, but the chemicals involved. 

> [!info] Why no EcoCyc for humans?
> 
> - Lots of more metabolites
> - Cell type difference -> metabolism difference
> - Complex gene regulation
> - Significant manpower and funding required

[Genome annotation](3.%20VU%20ISB%20Functional%20Genomics%20and%20Data%20Integration.md#Genome%20annotation) leads to identification of metabolic enzymes and its associated reaction(s), which it catalyzes.

When all metabolic genes are annotated, we know the full metabolic 'potential' of a genome.

## Building a stoichiometric model

Let's reiterate what is [Reaction rate](#Reaction%20rate): it is the number of reactions happening per unit volume per time. Say for the reaction $C_6H_{12}O_6 + 6O_2 \leftrightarrow 6CO_2 + 6H_2O$, every time the reaction happens, 1 glucose and 6 $O_2$ are consumed, and 6 $CO_2$ and 6 $H_2O$ are produced.

This makes the unit of the reaction rate [concentration per time](#^2de06f)

Therefore, we can use reaction rate to describe the rate of change of the concentration of the reactants.

Take the same reaction $C_6H_{12}O_6 + 6O_2 \leftrightarrow 6CO_2 + 6H_2O$, it is happening at rate $v$. This means $$\begin{aligned}
\frac{d[Glucose]}{dt}&=-v\\
\frac{d[O_2]}{dt}&=-6v\\
\frac{d[CO_2]}{dt}&=6v\\
\frac{d[H_2O]}{dt}&=6v
\end{aligned}$$, where $[x]$ means the concentration of $x$.

This can be expressed in matrix form as:
$$
\begin{bmatrix}
\frac{d[Glucose]}{dt}\\\frac{d[O_2]}{dt}\\\frac{d[CO_2]}{dt}\\\frac{d[H_2O]}{dt}
\end{bmatrix}=\begin{bmatrix}-1\\-6\\6\\6\end{bmatrix}v
$$

### Reaction Network

Multiple reactions related to each other forms a network.
$$S\overset{1}{\operatorname*{\leftrightarrow}}X\overset{2}{\operatorname*{\leftrightarrow}}Y\overset{3}{\operatorname*{\leftrightarrow}}P$$
Let's break down the network:
$$
\begin{aligned}
S &{\operatorname*{\leftrightarrow}} X\\
X &{\operatorname*{\leftrightarrow}} Y\\
Y &{\operatorname*{\leftrightarrow}} P
\end{aligned}
$$
Each of them has a different [Reaction rate](#Reaction%20rate). We name them as $v_1$, $v_2$, $v_3$. Then we can write the rate of concentration change for each reactant.

$$\begin{gathered}
\frac{d[S]}{dt}=-v_1 \\
\frac{d[X]}{dt}=v_1-v_2 \\
\frac{d[Y]}{dt}=v_2-v_3 \\
\frac{d[P]}{dt}=v_3 
\end{gathered}$$

The convention is describe the reactions as going from left to right and top to down, even though reactions are bi-directional. For example, the 1st equation tells that S is being consumed at the rate = $v_1$ (negative). Equation 2 tells X is being produced at the rate of $v_1$ and consumed at the rate of $v_2$.

### Stoichiometric matrix

The above equations can be written in matrix form:
$$\begin{pmatrix}\frac{d[S]}{dt}\\\frac{d[X]}{dt}\\\frac{d[Y]}{dt}\\\frac{d[P]}{dt}\end{pmatrix}=\begin{pmatrix}-v_1\\v_1-v_2\\v_2-v_3\\v_3\end{pmatrix}=\begin{pmatrix}-1&0&0\\1&-1&0\\0&1&-1\\0&0&1\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}v_1\\v_2\\v_3\end{pmatrix}$$
The matrix of 1s and 0s is called the **stoichiometric matrix**, $\mathbf{S}$. The vector of $v$s is called the **rate vector**, $\mathbf{v}$

The general case: $$\frac{d\boldsymbol{c}}{dt}=\boldsymbol{Sv}$$
### Stoichiometric matrix from reactions

We have written the matrix from the flux equations in section [Stoichiometric matrix](#Stoichiometric%20matrix). We can also write it from the reactions. They contain the _same information_.

Given a set of reactions such as:
$$\begin{aligned}
&\mathbf{R1:2A+B\to C+3D} \\
&\mathbf{R2:A+3B\to C+E} \\
&\mathbf{R3:A\to 2B+D+E} \\
&\mathbf{R4:4B\to D+A} \\
&\mathbf{R5:D+2B\to C+2E} \\
&\mathbf{R6:C+4E\to 3B+D}
\end{aligned}$$
We can write the stoichiometric matrix:
$$\begin{bmatrix}-2&-1&-1&1&0&0\\\\-1&-3&2&-4&-2&3\\\\1&1&0&0&1&-1\\\\3&0&1&1&-1&1\\\\0&1&1&0&2&-4\end{bmatrix}$$

Each **row** represents a reactant, i.e. A, B, C, D, E
Each **column** represents a reaction, i.e. R1, R2, R3, R4, R5, R6

> [!note] S and S'
> When writing $\boldsymbol{S}$, we do not include the reactants with constant concentration, such as glucose input and lactate output of the network.
> 
> When we include them, the matrix is called $\boldsymbol{S'}$

^ff0704

### Steady state

Without enzyme kinetics information, we cannot handle dynamic rates. 

$$\mathbf{0}=\boldsymbol{Sv}$$
defines the **steady state** of the reaction network.

The solution $\boldsymbol{v}$ to this equation defines the [Null Space N(S)](2.%20Multiplying%20and%20Factoring%20Matrices.md#Null%20Space%20$N(A)$) of the stoichiometric matrix.

> [!summary] Flux
> When talking about [Reaction rate](#Reaction%20rate) in steady state, we refer to it as **flux**.
> 
> In another word, flux _describes_ reaction rate.

## Calculating fluxes

### Determine the number of fluxes needed to solve the equations

- Compare the number of unknown fluxes to the number of independent equations.
- _You need $x$ equations to solve $x$ unknowns_.
- When the number of equations $n$ < the number of unknowns $x$, this leaves $x-n$ free fluxes (degrees of freedom). This corresponds to $x-n$ spanning vectors.

> [!note] Spanning Vectors
> The independent vectors that make up the [Null Space $N(A)$](2.%20Multiplying%20and%20Factoring%20Matrices.md#Null%20Space%20$N(A)$). Happens when the matrix is not full rank. When the matrix is full [rank](1.%20The%20Column%20Space%20of%20A%20Contains%20All%20Vectors%20Ax.md), the only solution to $Ax=0$ is $x=0$.
> 
> "Drawing" the spanning vectors means labeling the fluxes in the reaction network, not conjuring multi-dimensional space on your paper to draw the actual vectors.

^e31096

> [!note] Flux Mode
> Each [spanning vector](#^e31096) corresponds to a flux mode: a set of fluxes that make the system reach steady state.

> [!note] Kernel Matrix
> The matrix that contains all the [spanning vectors](#^e31096). 
> 
> Kinds of like how the [modal matrix](21.%20Eigenvalues%20and%20Eigenvectors.md#An%20eigenvector) contains all the eigenvectors of a matrix.

**For example:**$$S\overset{1}{\operatorname*{\leftrightarrow}}X\overset{2}{\operatorname*{\leftrightarrow}}Y\overset{3}{\operatorname*{\leftrightarrow}}P$$
We have 2 equations:

X constant: $v_1=v_2$
Y constant: $v_2=v_3$

There are 3 knowns: $v1$, $v2$, and $v3$.

> [!warning] Take Note!
> Don't consider S and P because they are assumed to be **constant concentration**. 
> 
> Read [S and S'](#^ff0704) again if you forget why!

**Another example:** Cyclic reactions

```tikz
\usepackage{tikz-cd}

\begin{document}
\begin{tikzcd}[row sep=tiny]
& Y \arrow[dd] \\
X \arrow[ur] \arrow[dr] & \\
& Z
\end{tikzcd}

\end{document}
```

Do [Gaussian Elimination](Gaussian%20Elimination.md) and look at the rank of the matrix. 3 fluxes and 2 independent equations. 1 flux is needed to determine all fluxes.

## Learning goals

- construct stoichiometric matrix from network diagram and vica versa  
- find a steady state rate vector given a diagram  
- determine a set of spanning vectors and draw those as rate vectors in a network diagram  
- show that a steady-state rate vector is a linear combination of spanning  
vectors  
- determine spanning vectors and rank with Gaussian elimination of the stoichiometric matrix  
- if you cannot do this, as Meike the mathematics refresher course teacher