# Drug Lethality and Computational Metabolic Engineering

[0. VU Introduction to Systems Biology](0.%20VU%20Introduction%20to%20Systems%20Biology.md)

## Lethality screen with FBA

Set a reaction to 0 in [Flux Balance Analysis](5.%20VU%20ISB%20Flux%20Balance%20Analysis.md#Flux%20Balance%20Analysis).
If it makes growth reaction to 0, the removed reaction is lethal.

Example: PGK, MALS, SUCDi
- PGK: growth=0
- MALS: no effect
- SUCDi: reduced growth but not 0

How to check if a drug have off-target effects? Create a variant of the target protein and see if the drug still binds.

**Reaction lethality** is non-trivial if 
- the reaction is needed for growth. Its flux is non-zero when maximizing growth.
- the maximal growth is 0 when the reaction in inactive.

Multiple reactions can be knocked out at the same time to reduce growth to 0.

## Flux Variability Analysis

First maximize the growth, get the maximum growth rate when reaction $k$ is inactive. Reaction k is the drug target, inactivated by the drug.
$$\begin{aligned}&\max v_{growth}\\&\boldsymbol{Sv}=\boldsymbol{0}\\&0\leq v_k\leq0\\&v^{min}\leq v\leq v^{max}\end{aligned}$$
This tells if reaction $k$ has an influence on growth.

Fix the growth rate at the maximum. Then minimize and maximize each other reaction, denoted by $k$. $$\begin{aligned}&\max/\min v_k\\&Sv=0\\&v_{growth}^{opt}\leq v_{growth}\leq v_{growth}^{opt}\\&v^{min}\leq v\leq v^{max}\end{aligned}$$
This gives the variability of each reaction when the growth is maximized and the drug is active as $$v_k^{opt,min}\leq v_k\leq v_k^{opt,min}$$

Example:

First fix growth to 0.87, the maximum growth rate. Then maximize and minimize SUCDi. The result is 4.53 to 1000. Why 1000? because there is a futile cycle around SUCDi consuming , only 5 goes to growth.

### Interpreting flux variability

$$v_{k}^{opt,min}= v_{k}^{opt,max} \ne 0$$
Needed for optimal growth, non-optimal growth when removed. Since its flux cannot be 0, it is needed for optimal growth. Since its value cannot change at all, it is essential for optimal growth. 

When all upper and lower limits of fluxes are equal, it also means that the FBA solution for the specified network and objective function is unique.

$$\begin{aligned}&v_{k}^{opt,min}\neq v_{k}^{opt,max}\\& v_{k}^{opt,min}>0,v_{k}^{opt,max}>0\end{aligned}$$
Needed, non-optimal growth when removed. Since its flux cannot be 0, it is needed for optimal growth. Since the upper and lower flux limits are not equal to each other, this implies that degenerate FBA solutions exist. In this case, the variability range for each flux represents the uncertainty of its FBA solution.

$$v_{k}^{opt,min}<0,v_{k}^{opt,max}<0$$
Needed, non-optimal growth when removed. For the same reason as above.

$$v_{k}^{opt,min}<0,v_{k}^{opt,max}>0$$
Not needed, optimal growth when removed. Not needed because its value can be 0. However, because its min and max bounds are less than $v_{k}^{min}$ and $v_{k}^{max}$, it means its value matter for optimal growth. Otherwise its value can vary from $v_{k}^{min}$ and $v_{k}^{max}$.

$$v_{k}^{opt,min}=v_{k}^{min},v_{k}^{opt,max}=v_{k}^{max}$$
Not needed, irrelevant to growth. Since it can be any value within its set bounds, it is irrelevant to growth.

