# Systems Biology Applications in Biotechnology

[0. VU Introduction to Systems Biology](0.%20VU%20Introduction%20to%20Systems%20Biology.md)

## Gene lethality screen is not the same as reaction lethality screen

- A reaction can involve multiple genes
- There are multiple ways to disable a reaction.
	- For example, when an enzyme is a heteromultimer, meaning it contains different subunits.
- Not all gene deletions lead to reaction inactivation. 
	- For example, isoenzymes are different enzymes, coded by different genes, that can activate the same reaction with different reaction affinities. When one is removed, the other still works.
	- LDHa and LDHb are isoenzymes.

## The Systems Biology Markup Language

[BioModels](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/): mathematical models of biological systems, record models in SBML language
[SBML](https://sbml.org/): system biology markup language

### SBML

**Captures**
- mathematical content: equations
- semantic content: biological components

**Overview**
- Machine-readable format
- Declares the model not the procedure
- Independent of modeling formalism
- Expressed in XML
- Include tools for reading and writing

**Models described**:
- Differential equation models
- Constrained models
- Rule-based models
- Spatial models
- Grid-based models
- Visualization
- Pharmacology
- Whole body model

## Computational Metabolic Engineering and Biotechnology

###  Motivation

- Make products biologically without chemical synthesis
	- Use microorganism to produce isobutanol
	- Biological production of energy with photosynthesis
- Predict which _genes_ (not reactions) need to be added or removed to obtain the intended result

### Yield

- **Yields** are ratios of fluxes. 
- Examples
	-  $Y_{glc}^{biom}=\frac{gram\ biomass}{mol\ glucose}=\frac{growth\ rate}{glucose\ uptake\ rate}$
	-  $Y_{glc}^{isob}=\frac{mol\ isobutanol}{mol\ glucose}=\frac{isobutanol\ growth\ rate}{glucose\ uptake\ rate}$
- The fluxes can be calculated with FBA. 
- Yields can be maximized with FBA
	- Maximize growth rate given a upper value of the uptake rate of glucose, maximizes $Y_{glc}^{biom}$
	- maximizes isobutanol production rate, given a upper value of the uptake rate of glucose, maximizes  $Y_{glc}^{isob}$

### Example: maximize yield of products on glucose using FBA

1. Maximize lactate production from glucose
	1. $Y^{lac}_{glc} = \frac{lactate\ excretion\ flux}{glucose\ intake\ flux}=\frac{mol\ lactate}{mol\ glucose}=2$
2.  Double the glucose input
	1. The yield does not change
3. Other products? None
4. Maximize acetate production
	1. Also makes formate and ATP to get rid of NADH
	2. When making lactate, NADH is consumed

### Trade-off between desired and alternative products

when a cell makes more ethanol from glucose, this is generally at the expense of making other products.  
• so,  
• the yield of biomass on glucose is maximal when no other products are made  
• the yield of ethanol on glucose is maximal when no other products, incl. biomass, are made  
• Thus growth and product formation trade off  
• making more of one is at the expense of another  
• the aim of metabolic engineering is to reduce undesired product formation by selecting optimal knockouts of genes.

### Aerobic and anaerobic growth

- Aerobic: uses electron transport chain and oxidative phosphorylation to produce ATP; efficient
- Anaerobic: uses fermentation to obtain ATP, makes formate, ethanol, acetate in the process. Less efficient.
### Bioreactor

high cell density, high production rate, but cost of cooling
low cell density, no cooling cost, but low production rate and chance of mutation that stops production

Evolution selects against making product over growth. If a mutant cell only grows while not making any product. It will out-compete the product-making cells.
### Example: which gene to knockout to maximize lactate production

First make the cell grow anaerobically by knocking out oxygen intake.
Then eliminate by-products by knocking out ACALD. This eliminates other products and growth.

