# Warburg Metabolism in Head and Neck Cancer

[0. VU Introduction to Systems Biology](0.%20VU%20Introduction%20to%20Systems%20Biology.md)

## Warburg Metabolism

Fermentation in the presence of abundant oxygen. This produces lactate instead of ATP.

This produces less energy than oxidative phosphorylation. So why do they do it?

Normally, 1 glucose leads to 2 lactate, but in experiments, 1 glucose leads to 3 lactate. This means something else is also metabolized in lactate.

The amount of pyruvate in the medium does not account. for the extra lactate.

An alternate possibility is the amino acids, which can come out and into the TCA cycle.

## Constraint based modeling

Used a genome scaled model. 

Human GEM -> cell line-specific proteomics data + list of known metabolic functions + tINIT (an algorithm) -> cell line-specific model

Normally, FBA is optimized for maximum growth rate, but cancer cells do not grow optimally. They also use glucose for other functions, like immune escape.

So FVA is done instead. Fix the growth rate to the observed rate, and get the ranges of the other rates. The result shows that glutamine must also be consumed to balance the carbons.

Reduced cost: the sensitivity of an objective flux to the constraint on an exchange flux, i.e. on a substrate consumption/product efflux. This gives a list of amino acids that lactate production is sensitive to, including glutamine.

## Why Warburg effect

Do they really have abundant oxygen? Oxygen is not as diffusive as carbon dioxide.

Glutamine must use oxygen to make ATP. Glucose can make ATP anaerobically. So all oxygen is used to make ATP from glutamine. Glucose is used to make ATP completely anaerobically.