[0. Understanding Deep Learning](0.%20Understanding%20Deep%20Learning.md)
## Introduction

Artificial Intelligence: building systems that simulate intelligent behavior based on logic (propositional logic), search (Dijkstra), and probabilistic reasoning (Bayesian models).

Machine learning: a sub-field of AI that involves fitting mathematical models to observed data.

Deep learning: fitting deep neural networks to data.

### Supervised Learning

Define a mapping from input data to an output prediction.

- Regression and Classification
	- Regression: predicts a value.
	- Classification: predicts a label.
- Input
	- Can be many types including tabular data, words, sounds, images, etc.
- Model
	- The model represents a family of equations mapping the input to the output.
	- Training the model means searching through the family of equations to find one that explains the data.
- Deep neural networks
	- A type of model that can represent a broad family of relationships
- Structured outputs
	- Deep learning can be trained to generate structured outputs like images from text, semantic segmentation, language translation, speech transcription, etc.

#### Multi-class vs. Multi-label Classification

For multi-class classification, each sample can only take on 1 label.
For multi-label classification, each sample can take on multiple labels.

### Unsupervised Learning

The model is trained without an output. The goal is to describe and understand the structure of the data.

- Generative models
	- Unsupervised models that can be used to generate new data.
	- Some learns the probability distribution of the input data and sample from it. Others learn a mechanism that generates new samples.
	- Examples: image and text generation, image inpainting, text completion.
- **Latent variables**
	- The amount of important variables for the distribution of the data can be less than the number of observed variables. These variables are called latent variables.
	- For example, the probability distribution of a human facial expression photo can be described by the state of the 42 muscles on the human face.
	- The role of deep learning is mapping the observed variable to latent variables.
	- The probability distributions of the latent variables are often designed to be simple, like a Gaussian distribution. This way, new data can be sampled easily from learned distributions.
	- By learning the latent representations of two samples, we can interpolate between these distributions to learn how one sample transforms into another.
- Connecting supervised to unsupervised learning
	- Supervised learning can be made easier by learning the mapping between latent variables of the input to the latent variables of the output.
	- Comparing to learning with observed variables, there are several advantages:
		- Need fewer data to train the model since the latent variables are lower dimensional.
		- More likely to generate meaningful output.
		- Multiple outputs can be generated by introducing randomness with noise.

### Reinforcement Learning

Trains an agent to take actions. The actions of the agent will change the state of the system but not necessarily in a deterministic way. The action will also produce rewards or punishments. The goal is to train the agent to choose the action that leads to high rewards.

Temporal credit assignment problem: the reward may not take place immediately. 

Exploration vs. exploitation: should the agent use learned methods to get modest rewards or try new actions?

Deep learning can be used to map observed state to an action. This is known as a *policy network*. The mapping is known as a *policy*.