# Live cell imaging and analysis

[0. VU QSCB](Biology/VU%20Quantitative%20Single%20Cell%20Biology/0.%20VU%20QSCB.md)
> Evelina

## Strain

- Strain YET911
- GAL1 promoter, GAL1 gene, RFP

## Yeast cultivation

Agar is a mixture of 2 polysaccharides:  
- linear agarose (70%)  
- mixture of smaller molecules agaropectin (30%)  
When mixed with water, it solidifies and forms a gel below about 32–42 °C

## Experimental procedure

First experiment:  
Grow strain 911 in liquid medium containing Raffinose.  
Transfer cells to agarose pad with 0.2% galactose and take images every 15  
min, while measuring mScarlet-I and GFP (background) fluorescence.  
Second experiment:  
Grow strain 911 in liquid medium containing glucose.  
Wash cells twice by centrifugation and resuspend in medium without carbon  
source.  
Transfer cells to agarose pad with 0.2% galactose and take images every 15  
min, while measuring mScarlet-I GFP (background) fluorescence.



dynamics, cell-cell, cell-envir, cell-physics

- segmentation between epithelial and fungus
- co-culture
- live 3D imaging, gene expression on fixed
- characterization of non-circular shape, mathematical representation of extending fungus
- hough transform
- video object recognition for tracking fungus
- physics model: which cell does it go to?
- time lag in response
- frequency domain decomposition of growth curve and RFP curve
- control theory: math description of fluorescence response. step function response; understanding the response: driven by promoter or others
- spatial temporal cell type clustering
- cell subtypes based on different features: shape, location, gene expression
- project gene expression to live imaging: train model to predict fluorescence?
- cell types
	- 
	- gene expression
	- periodicity of size changes