# Stochastic modelling

[0. VU QSCB](Biology/VU%20Quantitative%20Single%20Cell%20Biology/0.%20VU%20QSCB.md)

## Fitness consequences cont'd


## 

Observations:

- highly controlled promoters
	- highly expressed proteins need to be highly expressed; growth supporting proteins
- loosely controlled promoters
	- functions that do not need lots of protein expression
	- weak stress response systems
	- squally? systems
- bimodal promoters
	- preparatory expression of particular sets of proteins
	- persist phenotype prepared for adverse future (ex. antibiotic tolerant subpopulation)

##

Vary environmental condition
Measure fitness curve under the conditions`

optimal behavior

noisy gene: broad distributions, covers many conditions
tightly controlled gene: tight distributions, tracking environment changes
in a variable environment, should the genes be made more noisy or more tight?

how gene expression affects fitness
how evolution changes gene expression


---

## Stochastic simulation of biochemical systems

- simulate processes in cells
- The behavior of single cells emerges from the activities of molecular circuits that are inherently stochastic. Therefore we will sometimes need stochastic models to better understand molecular circuits behavior.

- 2 reactions $\underline{S}\overset{1}{\rightarrow}x\overset{2}{\rightarrow}\underline{P}$

$$
\begin{align}
v_{1}&=k_{1}\\
v_{2}&=k_{2}x \\
\text{synthesis}&=\text{degradation} \\
k_{1}&=k_{2}x_{s}
\end{align}
$$, $x_{s}$ is the steady state concentration

- assumes instantaneous synthesis and degradation
- in reality they are not coordinated and not instantaneous
- when there is lots of x, degradation (proportional to x) increases, bringing x conc down. When x conc is down, degradation slows down and x conc goes up

## Gillesbie algorithm

- continuous time discrete state Markov chains
- **Learn** stochastic simulations of mechanistic models _from_ cell-to-cell variation in transcript copy numbers
- **Predict** cell-to-cell variation in transcript copy numbers _from_ stochastic simulations of mechanistic models

- rate $v_{1}$ constant
- rate $v_{2}$ proportional to the copy number of x
- reaction that happens more often are more likely to happen
- Probability of the event: $P_{1}=\frac{v_{1}}{v_{2}+v_{1}}$, $P_{2}=\frac{v_{2}}{v_{1}+v_{2}}$, $\frac{P_{1}}{P_{2}}=\frac{v_{1}}{v_{2}}$
- When does the next reaction occur?
	- Prob that the next event is synthesis equal to 
	- Draw a random number from 0 to 1, if it falls to P1, synthesis occurs; if it falls to P2, degradation occurs
	- at bus stop, a bus comes every 30 mins, but you don't know when the last bus came. the avg. waiting time is 30 mins. 
	- if repeat the experiment many times, the prob that waiting time t = $\Delta t$ decreases exponentially as waiting time for next event $\Delta t$ increases
		- exponential: from fundamental physics principle from how molecules collide into each other
	- each single event in the scheme has an exponential waiting time
- 1 event: synthesis of x with rate constant $k_{1}$, exponential waiting time distribution, mean waiting time $\frac{1}{k_{1}}$. Sometimes it's shorter, sometimes it's longer, how often it happens is described by the exponential decay curve.
- 1 event: degradation of x with rate constant $k_{2}x$; with many molecules of X, degradation is faster, the next event is sooner, so the curve is shifted
- what is the time for the next event when you have two events? the two events occur independently.
	- total events per unit time is the sum of the 2 events
		- roll avocado 10 times per 10 sec
		- roll apple 5 times per 10 sec
		- total events in 10 sec is the sum of number of avocados and apples rolled in 10 sec
- which event: $p_{1}=\frac{v_{1}}{v_{1}+v_{2}}$, $p_{2}=\frac{v_{2}}{v_{1}+v_{2}}$

## Examples

- differential equation: represents the average level

- gene on or off
- when gene is on, mRNA is made. when gene is off, mRNA is not made
- add mRNA degradation, degradation can happen when gene is on or off
- when gene is on/off slowly, degradation effect is more profound. when the gene is on/off rapidly, on/off state has almost no effect as if the gene is always on.