
# smFISH II

> [0. VU QSCB](Biology/VU%20Quantitative%20Single%20Cell%20Biology/0.%20VU%20QSCB.md)
> Evelina

## Summary of smFISH

- morphology information
- spatial information
- single molecule: can only count low count. When the count is high, single molecules cannot be resolved.
- challenges: segmentation
- brightness of points: size of transcription burst

### FISH revealed that mRNA are spatially localized

- controlled by **zip-codes**
- “Zip-codes” are cis-acting motifs that direct mRNAs for transport to appropriate locations within a cell or organism
- They are found in the untranslated mRNA region (UTR) or in the coding sequence (CDS)
- Cis-acting motifs form secondary structures that are recognized by _RNA binding proteins and molecular motors_
- Transport direction affected by filament direction. Motor proteins can only follow one direction.
- Example: β-actin mRNA (red) localizes to the migrating fibroblast leading edge
- Examples:
	- lacY mRNA localization in E. Coli.
	- ASH1 mRNA localization in S. Cerevisiae
	- Bcd mRNA localization in D. Melanogaster oocyte
	- mRNA transport in M. Musculus neurons
	- SPX1 mRNA localization in Arabidopsis plant

#### Why localization

- Many prokaryotic and eukaryotic mRNAs are targeted to specific regions of the cell
- Cells are highly compartmentalized
- Compartmentalization results from protein localization at the right place
- Some of this spatial information comes from localized synthesis
- Spatiotemporal control of proteins production
- Rapid and response to local stimuli
- Facilitate protein assembly
- Controls cell differentiation and migration by generating cellular asymmetries

## Multiplex FISH to detect transcription

- Can detect many mRNAs in a sample
- Multiple fluorophore probes in different colors attached to a mRNA molecule. Probes are designed to be unique for mRNAs want to detect, acting as a barcode.
- Run different rounds of detection, each time using a different color filter, to identify barcode for each mRNA. ex. blue-red-yellow-green.
- Example: in situ transcriptomics using multiplex smFISH (MERFISH)
	- [1. STOmics简介](Biology/STOmics/猛犸训练营/1.%20STOmics简介.md)
- Example: mRNA compaction determined by multi-color,  single-molecule mRNA FISH coupled to super-resolved imaging (5-10 nm resolution)

## Summary

Single-cell RNA imaging technologies have emerged as a powerful tool to assess gene expression with high sensitivity and spatial  
resolution.  
They provide information about cell-to-cell variability and spatial control of gene expression.  
smFISH revealed that mRNA localize in sub-cellular compartments in many organisms.  
Multiplexed smFISH started the field of in-situ transcriptomics.  
The precise transport and translation pattern of localized mRNAs is dictated by cis-acting elements present on the mRNA molecule.  
These cis-acting elements are recognized by trans-acting factors (RNA-binding proteins), the recruitment of which contributes to the  
formation of an RNP of defined specificity.  
Comparative analysis of the sequence and structure of mRNAs with similar distributions and translation profiles, combined with the  
systematic identification of mRNAs associated with specific trans-acting factors, will help to further refine regulatory motifs and elucidate  the molecular codes controlling RNP-complex composition and behavior.

