# Carbon Metabolism

[0. VU QSCB](Biology/VU%20Quantitative%20Single%20Cell%20Biology/0.%20VU%20QSCB.md)
> Philip

---

> How do organisms grow?

## 

## Metabolic network
## Glycolysis

---


> Given a constant environment, how do microorganisms grow optimally?

## Fast in the past

- Cells switch to better carbon source when it is available to stay evolutionarily competitive

### Yeast generates its own dynamic environment

- Growth rate decreases when glucose is depleted
- Ethanol is produced as glucose is consumed
- When glucose is depleted, cells switch to growth on ethanol
- Some cells do not switch to ethanol growth immediately but wait for glucose to come back
- lactate glucose in bmbn

--- 

> Given a changing environment, how do microorganisms grow optimally?

## Metabolizing a non-preferred carbon source

- Glucose vs. galactose: $OH$ group at carbon 4 changes stereo position
- Can no longer be converted by hexokinase and enter glycolysis
- Leloir pathway: new set of genes required to convert galactose to glucose: GAL1, GAL7, GAL10

### Quantifying induction of the Leloir pathway

- How much do the cells commit to galactose growth?
	- Measure the rate of $Gal\rightarrow GalP\Rightarrow GlucP$, $GalP$ converts to $GlucP$ quickly
	- Measure mRNA abundance, protein abundance
	- Measure growth rate e.g. time required for growth to resume, time until maximal growth rate etc.
	- Stable isotope labeled flux analysis, not at the single cell level
	- smFISH: kills the cells
	- Using fluorescence labeled to the GAL genes and glucose genes. Color reflects galactose pathway activation
- How is Galactose metabolism induced when cells are growing on glucose – under conditions of catabolite repression? Glucose transitions to galactose slowly.
- What about when there is no catabolite repression? Raffinose should transition to galactose quickly.
- Adaptation response: mRNA expression, protein expression, growth

## Abundances at different levels of organization

- Metabolites and proteins have larger fluctuations
- genes, mRNAs, and TFs fluctuate in smaller ranges but have big implications
- Adaptation responses can be heterogeneous:
	- After environment changes, the following changes propagate down until max growth rate is achieved again.
	- Transcription (noisy, sensing vs. bet hedging, leaky expression, transcriptional bursts, feedback mechanisms)  - not all cells will express mRNA equally and at the same time
	- Translation (dependent on available transcripts, multiple proteins from a single transcript, generally less noisy than transcription). Also here, differences between level and timing of expression
	- Growth (dependent on available expression of needed enzymes). Noise in preceding processes propagate to growth. So, not all cells will start growing at the same time after nutrient change
- Leaky expression: 
- Amount of repression of alternative carbon source metabolism repression depends on how much better glucose is than the alternative carbon source.

---

## Take home messages

- Metabolic activity ultimately determines growth
- Regulation of metabolism determines growth optimality
- Yeast prefer glucose and will repress expression of unneeded genes
- A change in nutrient availability (e.g. carbon source) requires reorganization of metabolism
- Reorganization can be a noisy process, resulting in cell-to-cell differences and heterogeneous responses.
	- Quantifying this noise requires single cell approaches

## How to experimentally remove a carbon source

- Microfluidics
- Optical tweezer